Table of Contents
UNITED STATES SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 10-K
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the year ended December 31, 2023
Commission File Number 1-11758
(Exact name of Registrant as specified in its charter)
Delaware 1585 Broadway 36-3145972 (212) 761-4000
(State or other jurisdiction of New York, NY 10036 (I.R.S. Employer Identification No.) (Registrant’s telephone number,
incorporation or organization) including area code)
(Address of principal executive offices,
including Zip Code)
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
Trading Name of exchange on
Title of each class Symbol(s) which registered
Common Stock, $0.01 par value MS New York Stock Exchange
Depositary Shares, each representing 1/1,000th interest in a share of Floating Rate
Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, Series A, $0.01 par value MS/PA New York Stock Exchange
Depositary Shares, each representing 1/1,000th interest in a share of Fixed-to-Floating Rate
Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, Series E, $0.01 par value MS/PE New York Stock Exchange
Depositary Shares, each representing 1/1,000th interest in a share of Fixed-to-Floating Rate
Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, Series F, $0.01 par value MS/PF New York Stock Exchange
Depositary Shares, each representing 1/1,000th interest in a share of Fixed-to-Floating Rate
Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, Series I, $0.01 par value MS/PI New York Stock Exchange
Depositary Shares, each representing 1/1,000th interest in a share of Fixed-to-Floating Rate
Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, Series K, $0.01 par value MS/PK New York Stock Exchange
Depositary Shares, each representing 1/1,000th interest in a share of 4.875%
Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, Series L, $0.01 par value MS/PL New York Stock Exchange
Depositary Shares, each representing 1/1,000th interest in a share of 4.250%
Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, Series O, $0.01 par value MS/PO New York Stock Exchange
Depositary Shares, each representing 1/1,000th interest in a share of 6.500%
Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, Series P, $0.01 par value MS/PP New York Stock Exchange
Global Medium-Term Notes, Series A, Fixed Rate Step-Up Senior Notes Due 2026
of Morgan Stanley Finance LLC (and Registrant’s guarantee with respect thereto) MS/26C New York Stock Exchange
Global Medium-Term Notes, Series A, Floating Rate Notes Due 2029
of Morgan Stanley Finance LLC (and Registrant’s guarantee with respect thereto) MS/29 New York Stock Exchange
Indicate by check mark if the Registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act. Yes ☐ No ☒
Indicate by check mark if the Registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the Act. Yes ☐ No ☒
Indicate by check mark whether the Registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the
preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the Registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past
90 days. Yes ☒ No ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the Registrant has submitted electronically every Interactive Data File required to be submitted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation
S-T (§ 232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the Registrant was required to submit such files). Yes ☒ No ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the Registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, a smaller reporting company or an emerging
growth company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer,” “smaller reporting company” and “emerging growth company” in Rule 12b-2 of
the Exchange Act. (Check one):
Large accelerated filer ☒ Accelerated filer ☐ Non-accelerated filer ☐ Smaller reporting company ☐ Emerging growth company ☐
If an emerging growth company, indicate by check mark if the Registrant has elected not to use the extended transition period for complying with any new or revised
financial accounting standards provided pursuant to Section 13(a) of the Exchange Act. ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the Registrant has filed a report on and attestation to its management's assessment of the effectiveness of its internal control over
financial reporting under Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (15 U.S.C. 7262(b)) by the registered public accounting firm that prepared or issued its audit
report. ☒
If securities are registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act, indicate by check mark whether the financial statements of the Registrant included in the filing
reflect the correction of an error to previously issued financial statements. ☐
Indicate by check mark whether any of those error corrections are restatements that required a recovery analysis of incentive-based compensation received by any of
the Registrant’s executive officers during the relevant recovery period pursuant to §240.10D-1(b). ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the Registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act ). Yes ☐ No ☒
As of June 30, 2023, the aggregate market value of the common stock of the Registrant held by non-affiliates of the Registrant was approximately $136,317,364,533.
This calculation does not reflect a determination that persons are affiliates for any other purposes.
As of January 31, 2024, there were 1,635,268,297 shares of the Registrant’s common stock, $0.01 par value, outstanding.
Documents Incorporated by Reference: Portions of the Registrant’s definitive proxy statement for its 2024 annual meeting of shareholders are incorporated by
reference in Part III of this Form 10-K.Table of Contents
ANNUAL REPORT ON FORM 10-K
For the year ended December 31, 2023
Table of Contents Part Item Page Table of Contents Part Item Page
6. Derivative Instruments and Hedging
Business I 1 5 Activities 108
Overview 5 7. Investment Securities 112
Business Segments 5 8. Collateralized Transactions 113
Competition 5 9. Loans, Lending Commitments and Related
Allowance for Credit Losses 116
Supervision and Regulation 6
10. Goodwill and Intangible Assets 119
Human Capital 10
11. Other Assets—Equity Method
Information about our Executive Officers 12 Investments and Leases 120
Risk Factors 1A 13 12. Deposits 121
Cybersecurity 1C 26 13. Borrowings and Other Secured
Financings 121
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of 14. Commitments, Guarantees and
Financial Condition and Results of Contingencies 123
Operations II 7 28
15. Variable Interest Entities and
Introduction 28 Securitization Activities 129
Executive Summary 29 16. Regulatory Requirements 133
Business Segments 33 17. Total Equity 136
Institutional Securities 37 18. Interest Income and Interest Expense 139
Wealth Management 39 19. Deferred Compensation Plans and
Carried Interest Compensation 139
Investment Management 42
20. Employee Benefit Plans 141
Supplemental Financial Information 44
21. Income Taxes 144
Other Matters 44
22. Segment, Geographic and Revenue
Accounting Development Updates 45 Information 145
Critical Accounting Estimates 46 23. Parent Company 147
Liquidity and Capital Resources 48 Financial Data Supplement (Unaudited) 150
Balance Sheet 49 Glossary of Common Terms and Acronyms 153
Changes in and Disagreements with
Regulatory Requirements 53
Accountants on Accounting and Financial
Disclosure 9 154
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures
about Risk 7A 61 Controls and Procedures 9A 154
Risk Management 61 Other Information 9B 156
Market Risk 64 Disclosure Regarding Foreign Jurisdictions
that Prevent Inspections 9C 156
Credit Risk 68
Unresolved Staff Comments I 1B 156
Country and Other Risks 75
Properties 2 156
Financial Statements and Supplementary Data 8 80
Legal Proceedings 3 156
Report of Independent Registered Public
Accounting Firm (PCAOB ID No. 34) 80 Mine Safety Disclosures 4 156
Consolidated Income Statement 82 Market for Registrant’s Common Equity,
Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer
Consolidated Comprehensive Income
Purchases of Equity Securities II 5 156
Statement 82
Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate
Consolidated Balance Sheet 83 Governance III 10 157
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Total
Executive Compensation 11 157
Equity 84
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial
Consolidated Cash Flow Statement 85 Owners and Management and Related
Stockholder Matters 12 157
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 86
Certain Relationships and Related
1. Introduction and Basis of Presentation 86 Transactions and Director Independence 13 157
2. Significant Accounting Policies 87 Principal Accountant Fees and Services 14 157
3. Cash and Cash Equivalents 97 Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules IV 15 157
4. Fair Values 97 Form 10-K Summary 16 160
5. Fair Value Option 107 Signatures 161
2Table of Contents
Forward-Looking Statements
We have included in or incorporated by reference into this report, and from time to time may make in our public filings, press releases or
other public statements, certain statements, including, without limitation, those under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of
Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Risk” and “Legal Proceedings” that
may constitute “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform
Act of 1995. In addition, our management may make forward-looking statements to analysts, investors, representatives of the media and
others. These forward-looking statements are not historical facts and represent only our beliefs regarding future events, many of which,
by their nature, are inherently uncertain and beyond our control.
The nature of our business makes predicting the future trends of our revenues, expenses and net income difficult. The risks and
uncertainties involved in our businesses could affect the matters referred to in such statements, and it is possible that our actual results
may differ, possibly materially, from the anticipated results indicated in these forward-looking statements. Important factors that could
cause actual results to differ from those in the forward-looking statements include, without limitation:
• the effect of market conditions, particularly in the global equity, fixed income, currency, credit and commodities markets, including
corporate, commercial and residential mortgage lending, real estate and energy markets;
• the level of individual investor participation in the global markets, as well as the level and mix of client assets;
• the flow of investment capital into or from AUM;
• the level and volatility of equity, fixed income and commodity prices, interest rates, inflation and currency values, other market indices
or other market factors, such as market liquidity;
• the availability and cost of both credit and capital, as well as the credit ratings assigned to our unsecured short-term and long-term
debt;
• technological changes instituted by us, our competitors or counterparties, and technological risks, including risks associated with
emerging technologies, business continuity and related operational risks, including breaches or other disruptions of our or a third
party’s (or third-parties thereof) operations or systems;
• risk associated with cybersecurity threats, including data protection and cybersecurity risk management;
• our ability to effectively manage our capital and liquidity, including under stress tests designed by our banking regulators;
• the impact of current, pending and future legislation or changes thereto, regulation (including capital, leverage, funding, liquidity,
consumer protection, and recovery and resolution requirements) and our ability to address such requirements;
• uncertainty concerning fiscal or monetary policies established by central banks and financial regulators, government shutdowns, debt
ceilings or funding;
• changes to global trade policies, tariffs and replacement or reform of certain interest rate benchmarks;
• legal and regulatory actions, including litigation and enforcement, and other non-financial risks in the U.S. and worldwide;
• changes in tax laws and regulations globally;
• the effectiveness of our risk management processes and related controls, including climate risk;
• our ability to effectively respond to an economic downturn, or other market disruptions;
• the effect of social, economic, and political conditions and geopolitical events, including as a result of government shutdowns, changes
in U.S. presidential administrations or Congress, sovereign risk, acts of war or aggression, and terrorist activities or military actions;
• the actions and initiatives of current and potential competitors, as well as governments, central banks, regulators and self-regulatory
organizations;
• our ability to provide innovative products and services and execute our strategic initiatives, and costs related thereto, including with
respect to the operational or technological integration related to such innovative and strategic initiatives;
• the performance and results of our acquisitions, divestitures, joint ventures, partnerships, minority stakes or strategic alliances, or other
strategic arrangements and related integrations;
• investor, consumer and business sentiment and confidence in the financial markets;
• our reputation and the general perception of the financial services industry;
• our ability to retain, integrate and attract qualified employees or successfully transition key roles;
• climate-related incidents, other environmental and sustainability matters, and global pandemics; and
• other risks and uncertainties detailed under “Business—Competition,” “Business—Supervision and Regulation,” “Risk Factors” and
elsewhere throughout this report.
Accordingly, you are cautioned not to place undue reliance on forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date on which
they are made. We undertake no obligation to update publicly or revise any forward-looking statements to reflect the impact of
circumstances or events that arise after the dates they are made, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise,
except as required by applicable law. You should, however, consult further disclosures we may make in future filings of our annual
reports on Form 10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q and current reports on Form 8-K and any amendments thereto or in future press
releases or other public statements.
3Table of Contents
Available Information
We file annual, quarterly and current reports, proxy statements and other information with the Securities and Exchange
Commission (“SEC”). The SEC maintains a website, www.sec.gov, that contains annual, quarterly and current reports, proxy and
information statements, and other information that issuers file electronically with the SEC. Our electronic SEC filings are
available to the public at the SEC’s website.
Our website is www.morganstanley.com. You can access our Investor Relations webpage at www.morganstanley.com/about-us-ir.
We make available free of charge, on or through our Investor Relations webpage, our proxy statements, annual reports on Form
10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K and any amendments to those reports filed or furnished
pursuant to the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (“Exchange Act”), as soon as reasonably practicable after such
material is electronically filed with, or furnished to, the SEC. We also make available, through our Investor Relations webpage,
via a link to the SEC’s website, statements of beneficial ownership of our equity securities filed by our directors, officers, 10% or
greater shareholders and others under Section 16 of the Exchange Act.
You can access information about our corporate governance at www.morganstanley.com/about-us-governance, our sustainability
initiatives at www.morganstanley.com/about-us/sustainability-at-morgan-stanley, and our commitment to diversity and inclusion
at www.morganstanley.com/about-us/diversity. Our webpages include:
• Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation;
• Amended and Restated Bylaws;
• Charters for our Audit Committee, Compensation, Management Development and Succession Committee, Governance and
Sustainability Committee, Operations and Technology Committee, and Risk Committee;
• Corporate Governance Policies;
• Policy Regarding Corporate Political Activities;
• Policy Regarding Shareholder Rights Plan;
• Equity Ownership Commitment;
• Code of Ethics and Business Conduct;
• Code of Conduct;
• Integrity Hotline Information;
• Environmental and Social Policies; and
• 2022 ESG Report: Diversity & Inclusion, Climate, and Sustainability.
Our Code of Ethics and Business Conduct applies to all directors, officers and employees, including our Chief Executive Officer,
Chief Financial Officer and Deputy Chief Financial Officer. We will post any amendments to the Code of Ethics and Business
Conduct and any waivers that are required to be disclosed by the rules of either the SEC or the New York Stock Exchange LLC
(“NYSE”) on our website. You can request a copy of these documents, excluding exhibits, at no cost, by contacting Investor
Relations, 1585 Broadway, New York, NY 10036 (212-761-4000). The information on our website is not incorporated by
reference into this report.
4Table of Contents
Business position also depends substantially on our ability to continue
to attract and retain highly qualified employees while
Overview managing compensation and other costs. We compete with
commercial banks, investment banking firms, brokerage
We are a global financial services firm that, through our firms, insurance companies, exchanges, electronic trading and
subsidiaries and affiliates, advises, and originates, trades, clearing platforms, financial data repositories, investment
manages and distributes capital for governments, institutions advisers and sponsors of mutual funds, hedge funds, real
and individuals. We were originally incorporated under the assets funds and private credit and equity funds, energy
laws of the State of Delaware in 1981, and our predecessor companies, financial technology firms and other companies
companies date back to 1924. We are a financial holding offering financial and ancillary services in the U.S. and
company (“FHC”) regulated by the Board of Governors of the globally, including, in certain instances, through the internet.
Federal Reserve System (“Federal Reserve”) under the Bank In addition, restrictive laws and regulations applicable to
Holding Company Act of 1956, as amended (“BHC Act”). certain global financial services institutions, which have been
We conduct our business from our headquarters in and around increasing in complexity and volume, may prohibit us from
New York City, our regional offices and branches throughout engaging in certain transactions, impose more stringent
the U.S. and our principal offices in London, Frankfurt, capital and liquidity requirements, and increase costs, and can
Tokyo, Hong Kong and other world financial centers. Unless put us at a competitive disadvantage to competitors in certain
the context otherwise requires, the terms “Morgan Stanley,” businesses not subject to these same requirements. See also
the “Firm,” “us,” “we” and “our” mean Morgan Stanley (the “Supervision and Regulation” herein and “Risk Factors.”
“Parent Company”) together with its consolidated
subsidiaries. See the “Glossary of Common Terms and We compete directly in the U.S. and globally with other
Acronyms” for the definition of certain terms and acronyms securities and financial services firms and broker-dealers and
used throughout the 2023 Form 10-K. with others on a regional or product basis. Additionally, there
is increased competition driven by established firms and asset
Financial information concerning us, our business segments managers, as well as the emergence of new firms, non-
and geographic regions for each of the years ended December financial companies and business models, including
31, 2023, December 31, 2022, and December 31, 2021 is innovative uses of technology, competing for the same clients
included in “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” and assets, or offering similar products and services to retail
and institutional customers. We also compete with companies
Business Segments
that provide online trading and banking services, investment
advisory services, robo-advice capabilities, access to digital
We are a global financial services firm that maintains
asset capabilities and services, and other financial products
significant market positions in each of our business segments:
and services.
Institutional Securities, Wealth Management and Investment
Management. Through our subsidiaries and affiliates, we
Our ability to access capital at competitive rates (which is
provide a wide variety of products and services to a large and
generally impacted by, among other things, our credit spreads
diversified group of clients and customers, including
and ratings) and to commit and deploy capital efficiently,
corporations, governments, financial institutions and
particularly in our more capital-intensive businesses,
individuals. Additional information related to our business
including underwriting and sales, trading, financing and
segments, respective clients, and products and services
market-making activities, also affects our competitive
provided is included under “Management’s Discussion and
position. We expect clients to continue to request that we
Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.”
provide loans or lending commitments in connection with
certain investment banking activities.
Competition
It is possible that competition may become even more intense
All aspects of our businesses are highly competitive, and we
as we continue to compete with financial or other institutions
expect them to remain so. We compete in the U.S. and
that may be larger, or better capitalized, or may have a
globally for clients, market share and human talent. Operating
stronger local presence and longer operating history in certain
within the financial services industry on a global basis
geographies or products. Many of these firms have the ability
presents, among other things, technological, risk management,
to offer a wide range of products and services through
regulatory, infrastructure and other challenges that require
different platforms that may enhance their competitive
effective resource allocation in order for us to remain
position and could result in additional pricing pressure on our
competitive. Our competitive position depends on a number
businesses.
of factors, including our reputation, client experience, the
quality and consistency of our long-term investment
We continue to experience price competition in some of our
performance, innovation, execution, relative pricing and other
businesses. In particular, the ability to execute securities,
factors, including entering into new or expanding current
derivatives and other financial instrument trades electronically
businesses as a result of acquisitions and other strategic
on exchanges, swap execution facilities and other automated
initiatives. Our ability to sustain or improve our competitive
trading platforms, and the introduction and application of new
5 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
technologies will likely continue the pressure on our Scope of Permitted Activities. The BHC Act limits the
revenues. The trend toward direct access to automated, activities of BHCs and FHCs and grants the Federal Reserve
electronic markets will likely continue as additional markets authority to limit our ability to conduct activities. We must
move to more automated trading platforms. We have obtain the Federal Reserve’s approval before engaging in
experienced and will likely continue to experience certain banking and other financial activities both in the U.S.
competitive pressures in these and other areas in the future. and internationally.
Our ability to compete successfully in the investment The BHC Act grandfathers “activities related to the trading,
management industry is affected by several factors, including sale or investment in commodities and underlying physical
our reputation, quality of investment professionals, properties,” provided that we were engaged in “any of such
performance of investment strategies or product offerings activities as of September 30, 1997 in the U.S.” and provided
relative to peers and appropriate benchmark indices, that certain other conditions that are within our reasonable
advertising and sales promotion efforts, fee levels, the control are satisfied. We currently engage in our commodities
effectiveness of and access to distribution channels and activities pursuant to the BHC Act grandfather exemption, as
investment pipelines, the types of products offered, and well as other authorities under the BHC Act.
regulatory restrictions specific to FHCs. Our investment
products, including alternative investment products, may Activities Restrictions under the Volcker Rule. The Volcker
compete with investments offered by other investment Rule prohibits banking entities, including us and our affiliates,
managers, including by investment managers who may be from engaging in certain proprietary trading activities, as
subject to less stringent legal and regulatory regimes than us. defined in the Volcker Rule, subject to exemptions for
underwriting, market-making, risk-mitigating hedging and
Supervision and Regulation certain other activities. The Volcker Rule also prohibits
certain investments and relationships by banking entities with
As a major financial services firm, we are subject to extensive covered funds, as defined in the Volcker Rule, subject to a
regulation by U.S. federal and state regulatory agencies and number of exemptions and exclusions.
securities exchanges and by regulators and exchanges in each
of the major markets where we conduct our business. Capital Requirements. The Federal Reserve establishes
capital requirements largely based on the Basel III capital
We continue to monitor the changing political, tax and standards established by the Basel Committee on Banking
regulatory environment. While it is likely that there will be Supervision (“Basel Committee”), including well-capitalized
changes in the way major financial institutions are regulated standards, for large BHCs and evaluates our compliance with
in both the U.S. and other markets in which we operate, it such requirements. The Office of the Comptroller of the
remains difficult to predict the exact impact these changes Currency (“OCC”) establishes similar capital requirements
will have on our business, financial condition, results of and standards for Morgan Stanley Bank, N.A. (“MSBNA”)
operations and cash flows for a particular future period. We and Morgan Stanley Private Bank, National Association
expect to remain subject to extensive supervision and (“MSPBNA”) (together, our “U.S. Bank Subsidiaries”).
regulation.
The Federal Reserve, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
Financial Holding Company (“FDIC”) and the OCC (collectively, “U.S. banking
agencies”) have proposed a comprehensive set of revisions to
Consolidated Supervision. We operate as a bank holding
their capital requirements based on changes to the Basel III
company (“BHC”) and FHC under the BHC Act and are
capital standards finalized by the Basel Committee. The
subject to comprehensive consolidated supervision, regulation
impact on us of any revisions to the capital requirements is
and examination by the Federal Reserve. In particular, we are
uncertain and depends on the adoption of final rulemakings
subject to (among other things): significant regulation and
by the U.S. banking agencies. For additional information, see
supervision; intensive scrutiny of our businesses and plans for
“Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial
expansion of those businesses; limitations on activities; a
Condition and Results of Operations—Liquidity and Capital
systemic risk regime that imposes heightened capital and
Resources—Regulatory Requirements—Regulatory
liquidity requirements; restrictions on activities and
Developments and Other Matters—Basel III Endgame
investments imposed by a section of the BHC Act added by
Proposal.”
the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection
Act (“Dodd-Frank Act”) referred to as the “Volcker Rule,” In addition, many of our regulated subsidiaries are subject to
and comprehensive derivatives regulation. In addition, the regulatory capital requirements, including regulated
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (“CFPB”) has primary subsidiaries registered as swap dealers with the U.S.
rulemaking, enforcement and examination authority over us Commodity Futures Trading Commission (“CFTC”) or
and our subsidiaries with respect to federal consumer conditionally registered as security-based swap dealers with
protection laws. the SEC or registered as broker-dealers or futures commission
merchants.
December 2023 Form 10-K 6Table of Contents
For more information about the specific capital requirements systemically important financial institutions supervised by the
applicable to us and our U.S. Bank Subsidiaries, as well as Federal Reserve). In addition, we are subject to a limit of 25%
our subsidiaries that are broker-dealers, swap dealers and of Tier 1 capital for aggregate net credit exposures to any
security-based swap dealers, see “Management’s Discussion other unaffiliated counterparty.
and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of
Operations—Liquidity and Capital Resources—Regulatory The Federal Reserve may establish additional prudential
Requirements” and Note 16 to the financial statements. standards for large BHCs, including with respect to an early
remediation framework, contingent capital, enhanced public
Capital Planning, Stress Tests and Capital Distributions. The disclosures and limits on short-term debt, including off-
Federal Reserve has adopted capital planning and stress test balance sheet exposures. See “Management’s Discussion and
requirements for large BHCs, including Morgan Stanley. For Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations—
more information about our capital planning and stress test Liquidity and Capital Resources—Regulatory Requirements
requirements, see “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of —Total Loss-Absorbing Capacity, Long-Term Debt and
Financial Condition and Results of Operations—Liquidity Clean Holding Company Requirements.”
and Capital Resources—Regulatory Requirements.”
If the Federal Reserve or the Financial Stability Oversight
In addition, the Federal Reserve, the OCC and the FDIC have Council determines that a BHC with $250 billion or more in
the authority to prohibit or limit the payment of dividends by consolidated assets poses a “grave threat” to U.S. financial
the banking organizations they supervise, including us and stability, the institution may be, among other things, restricted
our U.S. Bank Subsidiaries, if, in the banking regulator’s in its ability to merge or offer financial products and/or
opinion, payment of a dividend would constitute an unsafe or required to terminate activities and dispose of assets. See also
unsound practice in light of the financial condition of the “Capital Requirements” and “Liquidity Requirements” and
banking organization. For information about the Federal “Resolution and Recovery Planning” herein.
Reserve’s restrictions on capital distributions for large BHCs,
see “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Resolution and Recovery Planning. We are required to submit
Condition and Results of Operations—Liquidity and Capital once every two years to the Federal Reserve and the FDIC a
Resources—Regulatory Requirements—Capital Plans, Stress resolution plan that describes our strategy for a rapid and
Tests and the Stress Capital Buffer.” All of these policies and orderly resolution under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code in the
other requirements could affect our ability to pay dividends event of our material financial distress or failure. Interim
and/or repurchase stock or require us to provide capital updates are required in certain limited circumstances,
assistance to our U.S. Bank Subsidiaries under circumstances including material mergers or acquisitions or fundamental
that we would not otherwise decide to do. changes to our resolution strategy.
Liquidity Requirements. In addition to capital regulations, the Our preferred resolution strategy, which is set out in our most
U.S. banking agencies have adopted liquidity and funding recent resolution plan, is an SPOE strategy, which generally
standards, including the LCR, the NSFR, liquidity stress contemplates the provision of adequate capital and liquidity
testing and associated liquidity reserve requirements. by the Parent Company to certain of its subsidiaries so that
such subsidiaries have the resources necessary to implement
For more information, see “Management’s Discussion and the resolution strategy after the Parent Company has filed for
Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations— bankruptcy.
Liquidity and Capital Resources—Balance Sheet—
Regulatory Liquidity Framework.” Our next resolution plan is due July 1, 2025. Further, we
submit an annual recovery plan to the Federal Reserve that
Systemic Risk Regime. Under rules issued by the Federal outlines the steps that management could take over time to
Reserve, large BHCs, including Morgan Stanley, must generate or conserve financial resources in times of prolonged
conduct internal liquidity stress tests, maintain unencumbered financial stress.
highly liquid assets to meet projected net cash outflows for 30
days over the range of liquidity stress scenarios used in Certain of our domestic and foreign subsidiaries are also
internal stress tests, and comply with various liquidity risk subject to resolution and recovery planning requirements in
management requirements. These large BHCs also must the jurisdictions in which they operate. For example, the
comply with a range of risk management and corporate FDIC currently requires certain insured depository institutions
governance requirements. (“IDI”), including our U.S. Bank Subsidiaries, to submit a
resolution plan every three years that describes the IDI’s
The Federal Reserve also imposes single-counterparty credit strategy for a rapid and orderly resolution in the event of
limits (“SCCL”) for large banking organizations. U.S. Global material financial distress or failure of the IDI.
systemically important banks (“G-SIBs”), including us, are
subject to a limit of 15% of Tier 1 capital for aggregate net In addition, certain financial companies, including BHCs such
credit exposures to any “major counterparty” (defined to as the Firm and certain of its subsidiaries, can be subject to a
include other U.S. G-SIBs, foreign G-SIBs and non-bank resolution proceeding under the orderly liquidation authority,
7 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
with the FDIC being appointed as receiver, provided that localization requirements and restrictions on cross-border
determination of extraordinary financial distress and systemic transfer of personal and other data that may restrict our ability
risk is made by the U.S. Treasury Secretary in consultation to conduct business in those jurisdictions or create additional
with the U.S. President. Regulators have adopted certain financial and regulatory burdens to do so.
orderly liquidation authority implementing regulations and
may expand or clarify these regulations in the future. If we Numerous jurisdictions have passed laws, rules and
were subject to the orderly liquidation authority, the FDIC regulations in these areas and many are considering new or
would have considerable powers, including: the power to updated ones that could impact our businesses, particularly as
remove directors and officers responsible for our failure and the application, interpretation and enforcement of these laws,
to appoint new directors and officers; the power to assign our rules and regulations are often uncertain and evolving. Many
assets and liabilities to a third party or bridge financial aspects of our businesses are subject to legal requirements
company without the need for creditor consent or prior court concerning the use and protection of certain customer and
review; the ability to differentiate among our creditors, other information, as well as the privacy and cybersecurity
including treating certain creditors within the same class laws referenced above. We have adopted measures designed
better than others, subject to a minimum recovery right on the to comply with these and related applicable requirements in
part of disfavored creditors to receive at least what they would all relevant jurisdictions.
have received in bankruptcy liquidation; and broad powers to
For additional information on our cybersecurity strategy and
administer the claims process to determine distributions from
processes, see “Cybersecurity.”
the assets of the receivership. The FDIC has been developing
an SPOE strategy that could be used to implement the orderly
Institutional Securities and Wealth Management
liquidation authority.
U.S. Bank Subsidiaries. Our U.S. Bank Subsidiaries are
Regulators have also taken and proposed various actions to
FDIC-insured depository institutions subject to supervision,
facilitate an SPOE strategy under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code,
regulation and examination by the OCC and are subject to the
the orderly liquidation authority or other resolution regimes.
OCC’s risk governance guidelines, which establish
heightened standards for a large IDI’s risk governance
For more information about our resolution plan-related
framework and the oversight of that framework by the IDI’s
submissions and associated regulatory actions, see “Risk
board of directors. Our U.S. Bank Subsidiaries are also
Factors—Legal, Regulatory and Compliance Risk,”
subject to prompt corrective action standards, which require
“Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial
the relevant federal banking regulator to take prompt
Condition and Results of Operations—Liquidity and Capital
corrective action with respect to a depository institution if that
Resources—Regulatory Requirements—Total Loss-
institution does not meet certain capital adequacy standards.
Absorbing Capacity, Long-Term Debt and Clean Holding
In addition, BHCs, such as Morgan Stanley, are required to
Company Requirements” and “Management’s Discussion and
serve as a source of strength to their U.S. bank subsidiaries
Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations—
and commit resources to support these subsidiaries in the
Liquidity and Capital Resources—Regulatory Requirements
event such subsidiaries are in financial distress. Our U.S.
—Resolution and Recovery Planning.”
Bank Subsidiaries’ business activities are generally limited to
Cyber and Information Security Risk Management and supporting our Institutional Securities and Wealth
Protection of Client Information Management business segments. Our U.S. Bank Subsidiaries’
business activities are generally limited to supporting our
The financial services industry faces increased global Institutional Securities and Wealth Management business
regulatory focus regarding cyber and information security risk segments.
management practices. Many aspects of our businesses are
subject to cybersecurity legal, regulatory and disclosure Our U.S. Bank Subsidiaries are also subject to Sections 23A
requirements enacted by U.S. federal and state governments and 23B of the Federal Reserve Act, which impose
and other non-U.S. jurisdictions. These requirements are restrictions on certain transactions with affiliates, including
generally aimed at codifying basic cybersecurity protections any extension of credit to, or purchase of assets from, an
and mandating data breach notification requirements. affiliate. These restrictions limit the total amount of credit
exposure that our U.S. Bank Subsidiaries may have to any
Our businesses are also subject to increasing privacy and data one affiliate and to all affiliates and require collateral for
protection legal requirements concerning the use and those exposures. Section 23B requires affiliate transactions to
protection of certain personal information with regard to be on market terms.
clients, employees and others. These requirements impose
mandatory privacy and data protection obligations, including As commonly controlled FDIC-insured depository
providing for individual rights, enhanced governance and institutions, each of our U.S. Bank Subsidiaries could be
accountability requirements, and significant fines and responsible for any loss to the FDIC from the failure of the
litigation risk for noncompliance. In addition, several other U.S. Bank Subsidiary.
jurisdictions have enacted or proposed personal and other data
December 2023 Form 10-K 8Table of Contents
Broker-Dealer and Investment Adviser Regulation. Our are subject to net capital requirements of, and certain of their
primary U.S. broker-dealer subsidiaries, Morgan Stanley & activities are regulated by, the CFTC and the National Futures
Co. LLC (“MS&Co.”) and Morgan Stanley Smith Barney Association (“NFA”). MS&Co. is also subject to
LLC (“MSSB”) are registered broker-dealers with the SEC requirements of, and regulation by, the CME Group, in its
and in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico and capacity as MS&Co.’s designated self-regulatory
the U.S. Virgin Islands and are members of various self- organization, and various commodity futures exchanges of
regulatory organizations, including the Financial Industry which MS&Co. is a member. Rules and regulations of the
Regulatory Authority (“FINRA”), and various securities CFTC, NFA, the Joint Audit Committee and commodity
exchanges and clearing organizations. Broker-dealers are futures exchanges address obligations related to, among other
subject to laws and regulations covering all aspects of the things, customer asset protections, including rules and
securities business, including sales and trading practices, regulations governing the segregation of customer funds, the
securities offerings, publication of research reports, use of use by futures commission merchants of customer funds, the
customers’ funds and securities, capital structure, risk margining of customer accounts and documentation entered
management controls in connection with market access, into by futures commission merchants with their customers,
recordkeeping and retention, and the conduct of their record-keeping and reporting obligations of futures
directors, officers, representatives and other associated commission merchants and introducing brokers, risk
persons. Broker-dealers are also regulated by securities disclosure and risk management. Our commodities activities
administrators in those states where they do business. Our are subject to extensive laws and regulations in the U.S. and
significant broker-dealer subsidiaries are members of the abroad.
Securities Investor Protection Corporation.
Derivatives Regulation. We are subject to comprehensive
MSSB is also a registered investment adviser with the SEC. regulation of our derivatives businesses, including regulations
MSSB’s relationship with its investment advisory clients is that impose margin requirements, public and regulatory
subject to the fiduciary and other obligations imposed on reporting, central clearing and mandatory trading on regulated
investment advisers. The SEC and other supervisory bodies exchanges or execution facilities for certain types of swaps
generally have broad administrative powers to address non- and security-based swaps (collectively, “Swaps”).
compliance, including the power to restrict or limit MSSB
from carrying on its investment advisory and other asset CFTC and SEC rules require registration of swap dealers and
management activities. security-based swap dealers, respectively, and impose
numerous obligations on such registrants, including adherence
The Firm is subject to various regulations that affect broker- to business conduct standards for all in-scope Swaps. We
dealer sales practices and customer relationships, including have registered a number of U.S. and non-U.S. swap dealers
the SEC’s “Regulation Best Interest,” which requires broker- and conditionally registered a number of U.S. and non-U.S
dealers to act in the “best interest” of retail customers at the security-based swap dealers. Swap dealers and security-based
time a recommendation is made without placing the financial swap dealers regulated by a prudential regulator are subject to
or other interests of the broker-dealer ahead of the interest of uncleared Swap margin requirements and minimum capital
the retail customer. requirements established by the prudential regulators. Swap
dealers and security-based swap dealers not subject to
Margin lending by our broker-dealers is regulated by the regulation by a prudential regulator are subject to uncleared
Federal Reserve’s restrictions on lending in connection with Swap margin requirements and minimum capital requirements
purchases and short sales of securities. Our broker-dealers are established by the CFTC and SEC, respectively. In some
also subject to maintenance and other margin requirements cases, the CFTC and SEC permit non-U.S. swap dealers and
imposed under FINRA and other self-regulatory organization security-based swap dealers that do not have a prudential
rules. regulator to comply with applicable non-U.S. uncleared Swap
margin and minimum capital requirements instead of direct
Our U.S. broker-dealer subsidiaries are subject to the SEC’s
compliance with CFTC or SEC requirements.
net capital rule and the net capital requirements of various
exchanges, other regulatory authorities and self-regulatory Investment Management
organizations. For more information about these
requirements, see Note 16 to the financial statements. Many of the subsidiaries engaged in our investment
management activities are registered as investment advisers
Research Regulation. In addition to research-related with the SEC. Many aspects of our investment management
regulations currently in place in the U.S. and other activities are also subject to federal and state laws and
jurisdictions, regulators continue to focus on research regulations in place primarily for the protection of the
conflicts of interest and may impose additional regulations. investor or client. These laws and regulations generally grant
supervisory agencies and bodies broad administrative powers,
Futures Activities and Certain Commodities Activities
including the power to limit or restrict us from carrying on
Regulation. MS&Co. and E*TRADE Futures LLC, as futures
our investment management activities in the event that we fail
commission merchants, and MSSB, as an introducing broker,
to comply with such laws and regulations.
9 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
In addition, certain of our subsidiaries are U.S. registered prudential requirements that are applicable under non-U.S.
broker-dealers and act as distributors to our proprietary law.
mutual funds and as placement agents to certain private
investment funds managed by our Investment Management Firmwide Financial Crimes Program
business segment. Certain of our affiliates are registered as
Our Financial Crimes program is coordinated and
commodity trading advisors and/or commodity pool
implemented on an enterprise-wide basis and supports our
operators, or are operating under certain exemptions from
financial crime prevention efforts across all regions and
such registration pursuant to CFTC rules and other guidance,
business units. The program includes anti-money laundering
and have certain responsibilities with respect to each pool
(“AML”), economic sanctions (“Sanctions”), anti-boycott,
they advise. Our investment management activities are subject
anti-corruption, anti-tax evasion, and government and
to additional laws and regulations, including restrictions on
political activities compliance programs and aligned business-
sponsoring or investing in, or maintaining certain other
line risk functions.
relationships with, covered funds, as defined by the Volcker
Rule, subject to certain limited exemptions. See also
In the U.S., the Bank Secrecy Act, as amended by the USA
“Financial Holding Company—Activities Restrictions under
PATRIOT Act of 2001 and the Anti-Money Laundering Act
the Volcker Rule,” “Institutional Securities and Wealth
of 2020, imposes significant obligations on financial
Management—Broker-Dealer and Investment Adviser
institutions to detect and deter money laundering and terrorist
Regulation,” “Institutional Securities and Wealth
financing activity, including requiring banks, broker-dealers,
Management—Regulation of Futures Activities and Certain
futures commission merchants, introducing brokers and
Commodities Activities,” and “Institutional Securities and
mutual funds to develop and implement AML programs,
Wealth Management—Derivatives Regulation” herein and
verify the identity of customers that maintain accounts, and
“Non-U.S. Regulation” herein for a discussion of other
monitor and report suspicious activity to appropriate law
regulations that impact our Investment Management business
enforcement or regulatory authorities. Outside of the U.S.,
activities.
applicable laws, rules and regulations similarly require
designated types of financial institutions to implement AML
U.S. Consumer Protection
programs.
We are subject to supervision and regulation by the CFPB
We are also subject to Sanctions, such as regulations and
with respect to U.S. federal consumer protection laws. Federal
economic sanctions programs administered by the U.S.
consumer protection laws to which we are subject include the
government, including the U.S. Treasury Department’s Office
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act’s privacy provisions, Equal Credit
of Foreign Assets Control (“OFAC”) and the U.S.
Opportunity Act, Home Mortgage Disclosure Act, Electronic
Department of State, and similar sanctions programs imposed
Fund Transfer Act, Fair Credit Reporting Act, Real Estate
by foreign governments or global or regional multilateral
Settlement Procedures Act, Truth in Lending Act and Truth in
organizations. In addition, we are subject to anti-corruption
Savings Act, all of which are enforced by the CFPB. We are
laws, such as the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act and the
also subject to certain federal consumer protection laws
U.K. Bribery Act, in the jurisdictions in which we operate.
enforced by the OCC, including the Servicemembers Civil
Anti-corruption laws generally prohibit offering, promising,
Relief Act. Furthermore, we are subject to certain state
giving or authorizing others to give anything of value, either
consumer protection laws, and under the Dodd-Frank Act,
directly or indirectly, to a government official or private party
state attorneys general and other state officials are empowered
in order to influence official action or otherwise gain an unfair
to enforce certain federal consumer protection laws and
business advantage, such as to obtain or retain business.
regulations. These federal and state consumer protection laws
apply to a range of our activities.
Human Capital
Non-U.S. Regulation
Employees and Culture
Our businesses are regulated extensively by non-U.S.
Our employees are our most important asset. With offices in
regulators, including governments, central banks and
42 countries, we have approximately 80 thousand employees
regulatory bodies, securities exchanges, commodity
across the globe as of December 31, 2023, whom we depend
exchanges, and self-regulatory organizations, especially in
on to build value for our clients and shareholders. To facilitate
those jurisdictions in which we maintain an office. Certain
talent attraction and retention, we strive to make Morgan
regulators have prudential, business conduct and other
Stanley a diverse and inclusive workplace, with a strong
authority over us or our subsidiaries, as well as powers to
culture and opportunities for our employees to grow and
limit or restrict us from engaging in certain businesses or to
develop in their career. We support our employees with
conduct administrative proceedings that can result in
competitive compensation, benefits, and health and wellbeing
censures, fines, asset seizures and forfeitures, the issuance of
programs.
cease-and-desist orders, or the suspension or expulsion of a
regulated entity, its affiliates or its employees. Certain of our
Our core values guide decision-making aligned with the
subsidiaries are subject to capital, liquidity, leverage and other
expectations of our employees, clients, shareholders,
December 2023 Form 10-K 10Table of Contents
regulators, directors and the communities in which we by location and include: health care and insurance benefits,
operate. These guiding values—Put Clients First, Do the mental health resources, flexible spending and health savings
Right Thing, Lead with Exceptional Ideas, Commit to accounts, paid time-off, flexible work schedules, family leave,
Diversity and Inclusion, and Give Back—are at the heart of child and elder care resources, financial help with fertility,
our workplace culture and underpin our success. Our Code of adoption and surrogacy, and tuition assistance, among many
Conduct is central to our expectation that employees embody others. Onsite services in our principal locations include
our values. Every new hire and every employee annually is health centers, mental health counseling, fitness centers and
required to certify to their understanding of and adherence to physical therapy.
the Code of Conduct. We also invite employee feedback on
our culture and workplace through our ongoing employee In 2023, we further enhanced our family support, women’s
engagement surveys. For a further discussion of the culture, health, mental health and wellbeing offerings. Our Global
values and conduct of employees, see “Quantitative and Wellbeing Board, comprised of senior management across the
Qualitative Disclosures about Risk—Risk Management.” Firm’s businesses and geographies, continues to shape and
advance our wellbeing strategy. For more detailed
Diversity and Inclusion information on our human capital programs and initiatives,
see “People and Culture” in our 2022 ESG Report: Diversity
We believe a diverse and inclusive workforce is important to
& Inclusion, Climate, and Sustainability (found on our
Morgan Stanley’s continued success and our ability to serve
website). The reports and information elsewhere on our
our clients. Our programming, including the Morgan Stanley
website are not incorporated by reference into, and do not
Institute for Inclusion, supports our workforce and helps to
form any part of, this Annual Report.
build a sense of community and belonging for all colleagues.
We have deepened our investments to recruit, advance and Human Capital Metrics
retain diverse talent through a holistic approach, focused on
At
professional development, health and wellbeing, benefits, and December 31,
Category Metric 2023
culture.
Employees by Americas 53
Employees geography Asia 17
Talent Development and Retention
(thousands)
EMEA 10
Employee % Proud to work at
We are committed to the development of our workforce and Culture engagement1 Morgan Stanley 92 %
supporting mobility and career growth. Our talent
Global gender % Women 40 %
development programs are designed to provide employees representation % Women officer2 29 %
Diversity and
with the resources to help them achieve their career goals, Inclusion U.S. ethnic % Ethnically diverse3 35 %
build management skills and lead their organizations. We diversity % Ethnically diverse
believe supporting employee development and growth representation officer2,3 28 %
contributes to long-term retention. Voluntary attrition
in 2023 % Global 8 %
Management Committee
We continue to offer leadership programs to support Retention average length of
employees as they progress in their career at the firm. Tenure service (years) 21
All employees average
length of service (years) 7
Compensation, Financial and Employee Wellbeing
Total compensation and
Compensation
Compensation benefits expense in
and benefits
We provide responsible and effective compensation programs 2023 (millions) $ 24,558
that reinforce our values and culture through four key
1. The percentage disclosed is based on the 2023 biennial employee engagement
objectives: deliver pay for sustainable performance, attract survey results, which reflect responses from 89% of employees.
2. Officer includes Managing Directors, Executive Directors and Vice Presidents.
and retain top talent, align with shareholder interests and 3. U.S. ethnically diverse designations align with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission’s ethnicity and race categories and include American Indian or Native
mitigate excessive risk taking. In addition to salaries, these
Alaskan, Asian, Black or African American, Hispanic or Latino, Native Hawaiian or
programs (which vary by location) include annual bonuses, Pacific Islander, and two or more races.
retirement savings plans with matching contributions, an
employee stock purchase plan, student loan refinancing and a
financial wellbeing program. To promote equitable rewards
for all employees, we have enhanced our practices to support
fair and consistent compensation and reward decisions based
on merit, perform ongoing reviews of compensation decisions
and conduct regular assessments of our rewards structure.
Our employees’ health is also central to our ongoing success.
We support the physical, mental and financial wellbeing of
our global workforce and their families by offering programs
focusing on awareness, prevention and access. Offerings vary
11 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Information about Our Executive Officers Daniel A. Simkowitz (58). Co-President (since January
2024). Head of Investment Management (October 2015 to
The executive officers of Morgan Stanley and their age and December 2023) and Co-Head of Corporate Strategy (June
titles as of February 22, 2024 are set forth below. Business 2021 to December 2023). Co-Head of Global Capital Markets
experience is provided in accordance with SEC rules. (March 2013 to September 2015). Chairman of Global Capital
Markets (November 2009 to March 2013). Managing Director
Mandell L. Crawley (48). Executive Vice President and
in Global Capital Markets (December 2000 to November
Chief Human Resources Officer (since February 2021). Head
2009).
of Private Wealth Management (June 2017 to January 2021).
Chief Marketing Officer (September 2014 to June 2017). Charles A. Smith (57). Executive Vice President and Chief
Head of National Business Development and Talent Risk Officer of Morgan Stanley (since May 2023). Head of
Management for Wealth Management (June 2011 to Institutional Securities Business Development (March 2017 to
September 2014). Divisional Business Development Officer May 2023). Chief Financial Officer of Institutional Securities
(May 2010 to June 2011). Regional Business Development (August 2012 to May 2017). President of Morgan Stanley
Officer (May 2009 to May 2010). Head of Field Sales and Bank, N.A. and Morgan Stanley Private Bank, N.A.
Marketing (February 2008 to May 2009). Head of Fixed (September 2011 to August 2012). Head of Firm Strategy and
Income Capital Markets Sales and Distribution for Wealth Execution (May 2008 to September 2011). Managing
Management (April 2004 to February 2008). Director in the Investment Banking Division (December 2005
to May 2008).
James P. Gorman (65). Executive Chairman of the Board of
Directors (since January 2012). Chief Executive Officer of Sharon Yeshaya (44). Executive Vice President and Chief
Morgan Stanley (January 2012 to December 2023). President Financial Officer (since June 2021). Head of Investor
(January 2010 to December 2011) and member of the Board Relations (June 2016 to May 2021). Chief of Staff in the
of Directors (since January 2010). Co-President (December Office of the Chairman and CEO (January 2015 to May
2007 to December 2009) and Co-Head of Strategic Planning 2016). Co-Head of New Product Origination for Derivative
(October 2007 to December 2009). President and Chief Structured Products (December 2012 to December 2014).
Operating Officer of Wealth Management (February 2006 to
April 2008).
Eric F. Grossman (57). Executive Vice President and Chief
Legal Officer of Morgan Stanley (since January 2012) and
Chief Administrative Officer (since July 2022). Global Head
of Legal (September 2010 to January 2012). Global Head of
Litigation (January 2006 to September 2010) and General
Counsel of the Americas (May 2009 to September 2010).
General Counsel of Wealth Management (November 2008 to
September 2010). Partner at the law firm of Davis Polk &
Wardwell LLP (June 2001 to December 2005).
Edward Pick (55). Chief Executive Officer of Morgan
Stanley (since January 2024). Co-President and Co-Head of
Corporate Strategy (June 2021 to December 2023). Head of
Institutional Securities (July 2018 to December 2023). Global
Head of Sales and Trading (October 2015 to July 2018). Head
of Global Equities (March 2011 to October 2015). Co-Head
of Global Equities (April 2009 to March 2011). Co-Head of
Global Capital Markets (July 2008 to April 2009). Co-Head
of Global Equity Capital Markets (December 2005 to July
2008).
Andrew M. Saperstein (57). Co-President (since June
2021). Head of Wealth Management (April 2019 to December
2023). Co-Head of Wealth Management (January 2016 to
April 2019). Co-Chief Operating Officer of Institutional
Securities (March 2015 to January 2016). Head of Investment
Products and Services (June 2012 to March 2015).
December 2023 Form 10-K 12Table of Contents
Risk Factors market conditions that in turn affect the size, number and
timing of investment banking client assignments and
For a discussion of the risks and uncertainties that may affect transactions and the realization of returns from our principal
our future results and strategic objectives, see “Forward- investments.
Looking Statements” preceding “Business” and “Return on
Tangible Common Equity Goal” in “Management’s Periods of unfavorable market or economic conditions,
Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results including equity market levels and the level and pace of
of Operations.” changes in interest rates and asset valuation, may have
adverse impacts on the level of individual investor confidence
Market Risk and participation in the global markets and/or the level of and
mix of client assets, including deposits, which would
Market risk refers to the risk that a change in the level of one negatively impact the results of our Wealth Management
or more market prices, rates, spreads, indices, volatilities, business segment.
correlations or other market factors, such as market liquidity,
will result in losses for a position or portfolio. We have direct Substantial market fluctuations could also cause variations in
exposure to market risk. In addition, market risk may also the value of our investments in our funds, the flow of
impact our clients and markets in a manner that may investment capital into or from AUM, and the way customers
indirectly impact us. For more information on how we allocate capital among money market, equity, fixed income or
monitor and manage market risk, see “Quantitative and other investment alternatives, which could negatively impact
Qualitative Disclosures about Risk—Market Risk.” the results of our Investment Management business segment.
Our results of operations may be materially affected by The value of our financial instruments may be materially
market fluctuations and by global financial market and affected by market fluctuations. Market volatility, illiquid
economic conditions and other factors. market conditions and disruptions in the markets may make it
difficult to value and monetize certain of our financial
Our results of operations have been in the past and may, in the instruments, particularly during periods of market uncertainty
future, be materially affected by global financial market and or displacement. Subsequent valuations in future periods, in
economic conditions, including in particular by periods of low light of factors then prevailing, may result in significant
or slowing economic growth in the United States and other changes in the value of these instruments and may adversely
major markets, both directly and indirectly through their impact historical or prospective fees and performance-based
impact on client activity levels. These include the level and income (also known as incentive fees, which include carried
volatility of equity, fixed income and commodity prices; the interest) in respect of certain businesses. In addition, at the
level, term structure and volatility of interest rates; inflation time of any sales and settlements of these financial
and currency values; the level of other market indices, fiscal instruments, the price we ultimately realize will depend on the
or monetary policies established by central banks and demand and liquidity in the market at that time and may be
financial regulators; and uncertainty concerning the future materially lower than their current fair value. Any of these
path of interest rates, government shutdowns, debt ceilings or factors could cause a decline in the value of our financial
funding, which may be driven by economic conditions, instruments, which may adversely affect our results of
recessionary fears, market uncertainty or lack of confidence operations in future periods.
among investors and clients due to the effects of widespread
events such as global pandemics, natural disasters, climate- In addition, financial markets are susceptible to severe events
related incidents, acts of war or aggression, geopolitical evidenced by rapid depreciation in asset values accompanied
instability, changes in U.S. presidential administrations or by a reduction in asset liquidity. Under these extreme
Congress, changes to global trade policies, supply chain conditions, hedging and other risk management strategies may
complications and the implementation of tariffs or not be as effective at mitigating trading losses as they would
protectionist trade policies and other factors, or a combination be under more normal market conditions. Moreover, under
of these or other factors. these conditions, market participants are particularly exposed
to trading strategies employed by many market participants
The results of our Institutional Securities business segment, simultaneously and on a large scale, which could lead to
particularly results relating to our involvement in primary and increased individual counterparty risk for our businesses.
secondary markets for all types of financial products, are Although our risk management and monitoring processes seek
subject to substantial market fluctuations due to a variety of to quantify and mitigate risk to more extreme market moves,
factors that we cannot control or predict with great certainty. severe market events have historically been difficult to
These fluctuations impact results by causing variations in predict, and we could realize significant losses if extreme
business flows and activity and in the fair value of securities market events were to occur.
and other financial products. Fluctuations also occur due to
the level of global market activity, which, among other things,
can be impacted by market uncertainty or lack of investor and
client confidence due to unforeseen economic, geopolitical or
13 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Holding large and concentrated positions may expose us to Our valuations related to, and reserves for losses on, credit
losses. exposures rely on complex models, estimates and subjective
judgments about the future. While we believe current
Concentration of risk may reduce revenues or result in losses valuations and reserves adequately address our perceived
in our market-making, investing, underwriting (including levels of risk, future economic conditions, including inflation
block trading) and lending businesses (including margin and changes in real estate and other asset values, that differ
lending) in the event of unfavorable market movements. We from or are more severe than forecast, inaccurate models or
commit substantial amounts of capital to these businesses, assumptions, or external factors such as global pandemics,
which often results in our taking large positions in the natural disasters, or geopolitical events, could lead to
securities of, or making large loans to, a particular issuer or inaccurate measurement of or deterioration of credit quality of
issuers in a particular industry, country or region. In the event our borrowers and counterparties or the value of collateral and
we hold a concentrated position larger than those held by result in unexpected losses. We may also incur higher-than-
competitors, we may incur larger losses. For further anticipated credit losses as a result of (i) disputes with
information regarding our country risk exposure, see also counterparties over the valuation of collateral or (ii) actions
“Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Risk— taken by other lenders that may negatively impact the
Country Risks.” valuation of collateral. In cases where we foreclose on
collateral, sudden declines in the value or liquidity of
Credit Risk
collateral may result in significant losses to us despite our (i)
credit monitoring, (ii) over-collateralization, (iii) ability to
Credit risk refers to the risk of loss arising when a borrower,
call for additional collateral or (iv) ability to force repayment
counterparty or issuer does not meet its financial obligations
of the underlying obligation, especially where there is a single
to us. For more information on how we monitor and manage
type of collateral supporting the obligation. In addition, in the
credit risk, see “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures
longer term, climate change may have a negative impact on
about Risk—Credit Risk.”
the financial condition of our clients, which may decrease
revenues from those clients and increase the credit risk
We are exposed to the risk that third parties that are
associated with loans and other credit exposures to those
indebted to us will not perform their obligations.
clients. Certain of our credit exposures may be concentrated
We incur significant credit risk exposure through our by counterparty, product, sector, portfolio, industry or
Institutional Securities business segment. This risk may arise geographic region. Although our models and estimates
from a variety of business activities, including, but not limited account for correlations among related types of exposures, a
to: extending credit to clients through various lending change in the market or economic environment for a
commitments; entering into swap or other derivative contracts concentrated product or an external factor impacting a
under which counterparties have obligations to make concentrated counterparty, sector, portfolio, industry or
payments to us; acting as clearing broker for listed and over- geographic region may result in credit losses in excess of
the-counter derivatives whereby we guarantee client amounts forecast. For further information regarding our
performance to clearinghouses; providing short- or long-term country risk exposure, see also “Quantitative and Qualitative
funding that is secured by physical or financial collateral, Disclosures about Risk—Country Risks.”
including, but not limited to, real estate and marketable
In addition, as a clearing member of several central
securities, whose value may at times be insufficient to fully
counterparties, we are responsible for the defaults or
cover the loan repayment amount; posting margin and/or
misconduct of our customers and could incur financial losses
collateral and other commitments to clearinghouses, clearing
in the event of default by other clearing members. Although
agencies, exchanges, banks, securities firms and other
we regularly review our credit exposures, default risk may
financial counterparties; and investing and trading in
arise from events or circumstances that are difficult to detect
securities and loan pools, whereby the value of these assets
or foresee.
may fluctuate based on realized or expected defaults on the
underlying obligations or loans.
A default by a large financial institution could adversely
affect financial markets.
We also incur credit risk in our Wealth Management business
segment lending to mainly individual investors, including, but
The commercial soundness of many financial institutions and
not limited to, margin- and securities-based loans
certain other large financial services firms may be closely
collateralized by securities, residential mortgage loans,
interrelated as a result of credit, trading, clearing or other
including home equity lines of credit (“HELOCs”), and
relationships among such entities. Increased centralization of
structured loans to ultra-high net worth clients, that are in
trading activities through particular clearinghouses, central
most cases secured by various types of collateral whose value
agents or exchanges may increase our concentration of risk
may at times be insufficient to fully cover the loan repayment
with respect to these entities. As a result, concerns about, or a
amount, including marketable securities, private investments,
default or threatened default by, one or more such entities
commercial real estate and other financial assets.
could lead to significant market-wide liquidity and credit
problems, losses or defaults by other institutions, or require
December 2023 Form 10-K 14Table of Contents
financial commitments to multi-lateral actions intended to As a major participant in the global capital markets, we face
support market stability. This is sometimes referred to as the risk of incorrect valuation or risk management of our
systemic risk and may adversely affect financial trading positions due to flaws in data, models, electronic
intermediaries, such as clearinghouses, clearing agencies, trading systems or processes, or due to fraud or cyberattack.
exchanges, banks and securities firms, with which we interact We also face the risk of operational failure or disruption of
on a daily basis and, therefore, could adversely affect us. See any of the clearing agents, exchanges, clearinghouses or other
also “Systemic Risk Regime” under “Business—Supervision financial intermediaries we use to facilitate our lending,
and Regulation—Financial Holding Company.” securities and derivatives transactions. In addition, in the
event of a breakdown or improper operation or disposal of our
Operational Risk or a direct or indirect third party’s systems (or third parties
thereof), processes or information assets, or improper or
Operational risk refers to the risk of loss, or of damage to our unauthorized action by third parties, including consultants and
reputation, resulting from inadequate or failed processes or subcontractors or our employees, we have received in the past
systems, from human factors (e.g., inappropriate or unlawful and may receive in the future regulatory sanctions, and could
conduct) or from external events (e.g., cyberattacks or third- suffer financial loss, an impairment to our liquidity position, a
party vulnerabilities) that may manifest as, for example, loss disruption of our businesses or damage to our reputation.
of information, business disruption, theft and fraud, legal,
regulatory and compliance risks, or damage to physical assets. In addition, the interconnectivity of multiple financial
We may incur operational risk across the full scope of our institutions with central agents, exchanges and
business activities, including revenue-generating activities clearinghouses, and the increased importance of these entities,
and support and control groups (e.g., information technology increases the risk that an operational failure at one institution
("IT") and trade processing). Legal, regulatory and or entity may cause an industrywide operational failure that
compliance risk is included in the scope of operational risk could materially impact our ability to conduct business.
and is discussed below under “Legal, Regulatory and Furthermore, the concentration of Firm and personal
Compliance Risk.” For more information on how we monitor information held by a small number of third parties increases
and manage operational risk, see “Quantitative and the risk that a breach or disruption at a key third party may
Qualitative Disclosures about Risk—Operational Risk.” cause an industrywide event that could significantly increase
the cost and risk of conducting business. These risks may be
We are subject to operational risks, including a failure, heightened to the extent that we rely on third parties that are
breach or other disruption of our operations or security concentrated in a geographic area.
systems or those of our third parties (or third parties
thereof), as well as human error or malfeasance, which There can be no assurance that our business contingency and
could adversely affect our businesses or reputation. security response plans fully mitigate all potential risks to us.
Our ability to conduct business may be adversely affected by
Our businesses are highly dependent on our ability to process
a disruption in the infrastructure that supports our businesses
and report, on a daily basis, a large number of transactions
and the communities where we are located. This may include
across numerous and diverse markets in many currencies. We
a disruption involving physical site access; software flaws and
may introduce new products or services or change processes
vulnerabilities; cybersecurity incidents; terrorist activities;
or reporting, including in connection with new regulatory
political unrest; disease pandemics; catastrophic events;
requirements, or integration of processes or systems of
climate-related incidents and natural disasters (such as
acquired companies, resulting in new operational risk that we
earthquakes, tornadoes, floods, hurricanes and wildfires);
may not fully appreciate or identify.
electrical outages; environmental hazards; computer servers;
communication platforms or other services we use; new
The trend toward direct access to automated, electronic
technologies (such as generative artificial intelligence); and
markets and the move to more automated trading platforms
our employees or third parties with whom we conduct
has resulted in the use of increasingly complex technology
business. Although we employ backup systems for our data,
that relies on the continued effectiveness of the programming
those backup systems may be unavailable following a
code and integrity of the data to process the trades. We rely
disruption, the affected data may not have been backed up or
on the ability of our employees, our consultants, our internal
may not be recoverable from the backup, or the backup data
systems and systems at technology centers maintained by
may be costly to recover, which could adversely affect our
unaffiliated third parties to operate our different businesses
business.
and process a high volume of transactions. Unusually high
trading volumes or site usage could cause our systems to
Notwithstanding evolving technology and technology-based
operate at an unacceptably slow speed or even fail.
risk and control systems, our businesses ultimately rely on
Disruptions to, destruction of, instability of or other failure to
people, including our employees and those of third parties
effectively maintain our IT systems or external technology
with whom we conduct business. As a result of human error
that allows our clients and customers to use our products and
or engagement in violations of applicable policies, laws, rules
services (including our self-directed brokerage platform)
or procedures, certain errors or violations are not always
could harm our business and our reputation.
discovered immediately by our technological processes or by
15 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
our controls and other procedures that are intended to prevent increased nation-state targeting of financial institutions in the
and detect such errors or violations. These can include U.S. and abroad.
calculation or input errors, inadvertent or duplicate payments,
mistakes in addressing emails or other communications, errors Information security risks may also derive from human error,
in software or model development or implementation, or fraud or malice on the part of our employees or third parties,
errors in judgment, as well as intentional efforts to disregard software bugs, server malfunctions, software or hardware
or circumvent applicable policies, laws, rules or procedures. failure or other technological failure. For example, human
Our use of new technologies may be undermined by such error has led to the loss of the Firm's physical data-bearing
human errors or misconduct due to undetected flaws or biases devices in the past. These risks may be heightened by several
in the algorithms or data utilized by such technologies. factors, including remote work, reliance on new technologies
Human errors and malfeasance, even if promptly discovered (such as generative artificial intelligence) or as a result of the
and remediated, can result in material losses and liabilities for integration of acquisitions and other strategic initiatives that
us, and negatively impact our reputation in the future. may subject us to new technology, customers or third-party
providers. In addition, third parties with whom we do
We conduct business in various jurisdictions outside the U.S., business or share information, and each of their service
including jurisdictions that may not have comparable levels of providers, our regulators and the third parties with whom our
protection for their corporate assets, such as intellectual customers and clients share information used for
property, trademarks, trade secrets, know-how, and customer authentication, may also be sources of cybersecurity and
information and records. The protection afforded in those information security risks, particularly where activities of
jurisdictions may be less established and/or predictable than customers are beyond our security and control systems. There
in the U.S. or other jurisdictions in which we operate. As a is no guarantee that the measures we take will provide
result, there may also be heightened risks associated with the absolute security or recoverability given that the techniques
potential theft of their data, technology and intellectual used in cyberattacks are complex, frequently change and are
property in those jurisdictions by domestic or foreign actors, difficult to anticipate.
including private parties and those affiliated with or
controlled by state actors. Additionally, we are subject to Like other financial services firms, the Firm, its third-party
complex and evolving U.S. and international laws and providers and its clients continue to be the subject of
regulations governing cybersecurity, privacy and data unauthorized access attacks; mishandling, loss, theft or
governance, transfer and protection, which may differ and misuse of information; computer viruses or malware;
potentially conflict, in various jurisdictions. Any theft of data, cyberattacks designed to obtain confidential information,
technology or intellectual property may negatively impact our destroy data, disrupt or degrade service, sabotage systems or
operations and reputation, including disrupting the business networks or cause other damage; ransomware; denial of
activities of our subsidiaries, affiliates, joint ventures or service attacks; data breaches; social engineering attacks;
clients conducting business in those jurisdictions. phishing attacks; and other events. There can be no assurance
that such unauthorized access, mishandling or misuse of
A cyberattack, information or security breach or a information, or cybersecurity incidents will not occur in the
technology failure of ours or a third party could adversely future and they could occur more frequently and on a more
affect our ability to conduct our business or manage our significant scale.
exposure to risk, or result in disclosure or misuse of
personal, confidential or proprietary information and We maintain a significant amount of personal and confidential
otherwise adversely impact our results of operations, information on our customers, clients and certain
liquidity and financial condition, as well as cause counterparties that we are required to protect under various
reputational harm. state, federal and international data protection and privacy
laws. These laws may be in conflict with one another or
Cybersecurity risks for financial institutions have significantly courts and regulators may interpret them in ways that we had
increased in recent years in part because of the proliferation of not anticipated or that adversely affect our business. A
new technologies; the use of the internet, mobile cyberattack, information or security breach, or a technology
telecommunications and cloud technologies to conduct failure of ours or of a third party could jeopardize our or our
financial transactions; and the increased sophistication and clients’, employees’, partners’, vendors’ or counterparties’
activities of organized crime, hackers, terrorists, nation-states, personal, confidential, proprietary or other information
state-sponsored actors and other parties. Any of these parties processed and stored in, and transmitted through, our and our
may also attempt to fraudulently induce employees, third parties’ computer systems and networks. Furthermore,
customers, clients, vendors or other third parties or users of such events could cause interruptions or malfunctions in our,
our systems to disclose sensitive information in order to gain our clients’, employees’, partners’, vendors’, counterparties’
access to our networks, systems or data or those of our or third parties’ operations, as well as the unauthorized
employees or clients, and such parties may see their release, gathering, monitoring, misuse, loss or destruction of
effectiveness enhanced by the use of artificial intelligence. personal, confidential, proprietary and other information of
Global events and geopolitical instability have also led to ours, our employees, our customers or of other third parties.
Any of these events could result in reputational damage with
December 2023 Form 10-K 16Table of Contents
our clients and the market, client dissatisfaction, additional on how we monitor and manage liquidity risk, see
costs to us to maintain and update our operational and security “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial
systems and infrastructure, violation of the applicable data Condition and Results of Operations—Liquidity and Capital
protection and privacy laws, regulatory investigations and Resources” and “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures
enforcement actions, litigation exposure, or fines or penalties, about Risk—Liquidity Risk.”
any of which could adversely affect our business, financial
condition or results of operations. Liquidity is essential to our businesses and we rely on
external sources to finance a significant portion of our
Given our global footprint and the high volume of operations.
transactions we process; the large number of clients, partners,
vendors and counterparties with which we do business; and Liquidity is essential to our businesses. Our liquidity could be
the increasing sophistication of cyberattacks, a cyberattack or negatively affected by our inability to raise funding in the
information or security breach could occur and persist for an long-term or short-term debt capital markets, our inability to
extended period of time without detection. It could take access the secured lending markets, our inability to attract and
considerable time for us to determine the scope, extent, retain deposits, or unanticipated outflows of cash or collateral
amount and type of information compromised, and the impact by customers or clients. Factors that we cannot control, such
of such an attack may not be fully understood. During such as disruption of the financial markets or negative views about
time we would not necessarily know the extent of the harm or the financial services industry generally, including concerns
how best to remediate it, and certain errors or actions could be regarding fiscal matters in the U.S. and other geographic
repeated or compounded before they are discovered and areas, could impair our ability to raise funding.
remediated, if at all, all or any of which would further
In addition, our ability to raise funding could be impaired if
increase the costs and consequences of a cyberattack or
investors, depositors or lenders develop a negative perception
information security incident.
of our long-term or short-term financial prospects due to
While many of our agreements with partners and third-party factors such as an incurrence of large trading, credit or
vendors include indemnification provisions, we may not be operational losses, a downgrade by the rating agencies, a
able to recover sufficiently, or at all, under such provisions to decline in the level of our business activity, if regulatory
adequately offset any losses we may incur. In addition, authorities take significant action against us or our industry,
although we maintain insurance coverage that may, subject to or if we discover significant employee misconduct or illegal
policy terms and conditions, cover certain aspects of cyber activity.
and information security risks, such insurance coverage may
If we are unable to raise funding using the methods described
be insufficient to cover any or all losses we may incur, and we
above, we would likely need to finance or liquidate
cannot be sure that such insurance will continue to be
unencumbered assets, such as our investment portfolios or
available to us on commercially reasonable terms, or at all, or
trading assets, to meet maturing liabilities or other
that our insurers will not deny coverage as to any future
obligations. We may be unable to sell some of our assets or
claim.
we may have to sell assets at a discount to market value,
We continue to make investments with a view toward either of which could adversely affect our results of
maintaining and enhancing our cybersecurity, resilience and operations, cash flows and financial condition.
information security posture, including investments in
Our borrowing costs and access to the debt capital markets
technology and associated technology risk management
depend on our credit ratings.
activities. The cost of managing cybersecurity and
information security risks and attacks along with complying
The cost and availability of unsecured financing generally are
with new, increasingly expansive and evolving regulatory
impacted by (among other things) our long-term and short-
requirements could adversely affect our results of operations
term credit ratings. The rating agencies continue to monitor
and business.
certain Firm-specific and industrywide factors that are
important to the determination of our credit ratings. These
Liquidity Risk
include governance, capital adequacy, the level and quality of
Liquidity risk refers to the risk that we will be unable to earnings, liquidity and funding, risk appetite and
finance our operations due to a loss of access to the capital management, asset quality, strategic direction, business mix,
markets or difficulty in liquidating our assets. Liquidity risk regulatory or legislative changes, macroeconomic
also encompasses our ability (or perceived ability) to meet our environment and perceived levels of support, and it is possible
financial obligations without experiencing significant that the rating agencies could downgrade our ratings and
business disruption or reputational damage that may threaten those of similar institutions.
our viability as a going concern, as well as the associated
Our credit ratings also can have an adverse impact on certain
funding risks triggered by the market or idiosyncratic stress
trading revenues, particularly in those businesses where
events that may negatively affect our liquidity and may
longer-term counterparty performance is a key consideration,
impact our ability to raise new funding. For more information
17 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
such as OTC and other derivative transactions, including Our liquidity and financial condition have in the past been,
credit derivatives and interest rate swaps. In connection with and in the future could be, adversely affected by U.S. and
certain OTC trading agreements and certain other agreements international markets and economic conditions.
associated with our Institutional Securities business segment,
we may be required to provide additional collateral to, or Our ability to raise funding in the long-term or short-term
immediately settle any outstanding liability balance with, debt capital markets or the equity markets, or to access
certain counterparties in the event of a credit rating secured lending markets, has in the past been, and could in the
downgrade. future be, adversely affected by conditions in the U.S. and
international markets and economies.
Termination of our trading agreements could cause us to
sustain losses and impair our liquidity by requiring us to find In particular, our cost and availability of funding in the past
other sources of financing or to make significant payments in have been, and may in the future be, adversely affected by
the form of cash or securities. The additional collateral or illiquid credit markets, interest rates and wider credit spreads.
termination payments that may occur in the event of a future Significant turbulence in the U.S., the E.U. and other
credit rating downgrade vary by contract and can be based on international markets and economies could adversely affect
ratings by Moody’s Investors Service, Inc., S&P Global our liquidity and financial condition and the willingness of
Ratings and/or other rating agencies. See also “Management’s certain counterparties and customers to do business with us.
Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results
Legal, Regulatory and Compliance Risk
of Operations—Liquidity and Capital Resources—Credit
Ratings—Incremental Collateral or Terminating Payments.”
Legal, regulatory and compliance risk includes the risk of
legal or regulatory sanctions; material financial loss, including
We are a holding company and depend on payments from
fines, penalties, judgments, damages and/or settlements;
our subsidiaries.
limitations on our business; or loss to reputation we may
The Parent Company has no business operations and depends suffer as a result of our failure to comply with laws,
on dividends, distributions, loans and other payments from its regulations, rules, related self-regulatory organization
subsidiaries to fund dividend payments and to fund all standards and codes of conduct applicable to our business
payments on its obligations, including debt obligations. activities. This risk also includes contractual and commercial
Regulatory restrictions, tax restrictions or elections and other risk, such as the risk that a counterparty’s performance
legal restrictions may limit our ability to transfer funds freely, obligations will be unenforceable. It also includes compliance
either to or from our subsidiaries. In particular, many of our with AML, terrorist financing and anti-corruption rules and
subsidiaries, including our bank and broker-dealer regulations. For more information on how we monitor and
subsidiaries, are subject to laws, regulations and self- manage legal, regulatory and compliance risk, see
regulatory organization rules that, in certain circumstances, “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Risk—Legal,
limit, as well as permit regulatory bodies to block or reduce, Regulatory and Compliance Risk.”
the flow of funds to the Parent Company, or that prohibit such
The financial services industry is subject to extensive
transfers or dividends altogether, including steps to “ring
regulation, and changes in regulation will impact our
fence” entities by regulators outside the U.S. to protect clients
business.
and creditors of such entities in the event of financial
difficulties involving such entities.
Like other major financial services firms, we are subject to
extensive regulation by U.S. federal and state regulatory
These laws, regulations and rules may hinder our ability to
agencies and securities exchanges and by regulators and
access funds that we may need to make payments on our
exchanges in each of the major markets where we conduct our
obligations. Furthermore, as a BHC, we may become subject
business, including an increasing number of complex
to a prohibition or to limitations on our ability to pay
sanctions and disclosure regimes. These laws and regulations,
dividends. The Federal Reserve, the OCC and the FDIC have
which continue to increase in volume and complexity,
the authority, and under certain circumstances the duty, to
significantly affect the way and costs of doing business and
prohibit or to limit the payment of dividends or other capital
can restrict the scope of our existing businesses and limit our
actions by the banking organizations they supervise, including
ability to expand our product offerings and pursue certain
us and our U.S. Bank Subsidiaries. See “We may be
investments.
prevented from paying dividends or taking other capital
actions because of regulatory constraints or revised regulatory
The Firm and its employees are subject to wide-ranging
capital requirements” under “Legal, Regulatory and
regulation and supervision, which, among other things,
Compliance Risk” herein.
subject us to intensive scrutiny of our businesses and any
plans for expansion of those businesses through acquisitions
or otherwise, limitations on activities, a systemic risk regime
that imposes heightened capital and liquidity and funding
requirements and other enhanced prudential standards,
December 2023 Form 10-K 18Table of Contents
resolution regimes and resolution planning requirements, debt. See “Business—Supervision and Regulation” and
requirements for maintaining minimum amounts of TLAC “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial
and external long-term debt, restrictions on activities and Condition and Results of Operations—Liquidity and Capital
investments imposed by the Volcker Rule, comprehensive Resources—Regulatory Requirements.”
derivatives regulation, interest rate benchmark requirements,
commodities regulation, market structure regulation, Further, because both our resolution plan contemplates an
consumer protection regulation, tax regulations and SPOE strategy under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code and the FDIC
interpretations, antitrust laws, trade and transaction reporting has proposed an SPOE strategy through which it may apply
obligations, broadened fiduciary obligations and disclosure its orderly liquidation authority powers, we believe that the
requirements. application of an SPOE strategy is the reasonably likely
outcome if either our resolution plan were implemented or a
New laws, rules, regulations and guidelines, as well as resolution proceeding were commenced under the orderly
ongoing implementation of, our efforts to comply with, and/or liquidation authority. An SPOE strategy generally
changes to laws, rules, regulations and guidelines, including contemplates the provision of adequate capital and liquidity
changes in the breadth, application, interpretation or by the Parent Company to certain of its subsidiaries so that
enforcement of laws, rules, regulations and guidelines, could such subsidiaries have the resources necessary to implement
materially impact the profitability of our businesses and the the resolution strategy, and the Parent Company has entered
value of assets we hold, impact our income tax provision and into a secured amended and restated support agreement with
effective tax rate, expose us to additional theories of liability such entities, pursuant to which it would provide such capital
and additional costs, require changes to business practices or and liquidity to such entities.
force us to discontinue businesses, adversely affect our ability
to pay dividends and repurchase our stock or require us to In addition, a wholly owned, direct subsidiary of the Parent
raise capital, including in ways that may adversely impact our Company, Morgan Stanley Holdings LLC (“Funding IHC”),
shareholders or creditors. serves as a resolution funding vehicle. The Parent Company
has transferred, and has agreed to transfer on an ongoing
In addition, regulatory requirements that are imposed by basis, certain assets to the Funding IHC. In the event of a
foreign policymakers and regulators may be inconsistent or resolution scenario, the Parent Company would be obligated
conflict with regulations that we are subject to in the U.S. and to contribute all of its material assets that can be contributed
may adversely affect us. under the terms of the amended and restated support
agreement (other than shares in subsidiaries of the Parent
The application of regulatory requirements and strategies in Company and certain other assets) to the Funding IHC. The
the U.S. or other jurisdictions to facilitate the orderly Funding IHC would be obligated to provide capital and
resolution of large financial institutions may pose a greater liquidity, as applicable, to certain supported subsidiaries,
risk of loss for our security holders and subject us to other pursuant to the terms of the secured amended and restated
restrictions. support agreement.
We are required to submit once every two years to the Federal The obligations of the Parent Company and of the Funding
Reserve and the FDIC a resolution plan that describes our IHC, respectively, under the amended and restated support
strategy for a rapid and orderly resolution under the U.S. agreement are in most cases secured on a senior basis by the
Bankruptcy Code in the event of material financial distress or assets of the Parent Company (other than shares in
failure. If the Federal Reserve and the FDIC were to jointly subsidiaries of the Parent Company and certain other assets),
determine that our resolution plan submission was not and the assets of the Funding IHC, as applicable. As a result,
credible or would not facilitate an orderly resolution, and if claims of certain supported subsidiaries, including the
we were unsuccessful in addressing any deficiencies Funding IHC, against the assets of the Parent Company with
identified by the regulators, we or any of our subsidiaries may respect to such secured assets are effectively senior to
be subject to more stringent capital, leverage, or liquidity unsecured obligations of the Parent Company.
requirements or restrictions on our growth, activities or
operations, or after a two-year period, we may be required to Although an SPOE strategy, whether applied pursuant to our
divest assets or operations. resolution plan or in a resolution proceeding under the orderly
liquidation authority, is intended to result in better outcomes
In addition, provided that certain procedures are met, we can for creditors overall, there is no guarantee that the application
be subject to a resolution proceeding under the orderly of an SPOE strategy, including the provision of support to the
liquidation authority under Title II of the Dodd-Frank Act Parent Company’s supported subsidiaries pursuant to the
with the FDIC being appointed as receiver instead of being secured amended and restated support agreement, will not
resolved under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code. The FDIC’s power result in greater losses for holders of our securities compared
under the orderly liquidation authority to disregard the with a different resolution strategy for us.
priority of creditor claims and treat similarly situated creditors
differently in certain circumstances, subject to certain Regulators have taken and proposed various actions to
limitations, could adversely impact holders of our unsecured facilitate an SPOE strategy under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code,
19 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
the orderly liquidation authority and other resolution regimes. The financial services industry faces substantial litigation
For example, the Federal Reserve requires top-tier BHCs of and is subject to extensive regulatory and law enforcement
U.S. G-SIBs, including the Firm, to maintain adequate TLAC, investigations, and we may face damage to our reputation
including equity and eligible long-term debt, in order to and legal liability.
ensure that such institutions have enough loss-absorbing
resources at the point of failure to be recapitalized through the As a global financial services firm, we face the risk of
conversion of debt to equity or otherwise by imposing losses investigations and proceedings by governmental and self-
on eligible TLAC where the SPOE strategy is used. The regulatory organizations in all countries in which we conduct
combined implication of the SPOE resolution strategy and the our business. These investigations and proceedings, as well as
TLAC requirement is that our losses will be imposed on the the amount of penalties and fines sought, continue to impact
holders of eligible long-term debt and other forms of eligible the financial services industry. Certain U.S. and international
TLAC issued by the Parent Company before any losses are governmental entities have brought criminal actions against,
imposed on the creditors of our supported subsidiaries or have sought criminal convictions, pleas, deferred
without requiring taxpayer or government financial support. prosecution agreements or non-prosecution agreements from
financial institutions. Significant regulatory or law
In addition, certain jurisdictions, including the U.K. and E.U. enforcement action against us could materially adversely
jurisdictions, have implemented, or are in the process of affect our business, reputation, financial condition or results
implementing, changes to resolution regimes to provide of operations, and increase our exposure to civil litigation.
resolution authorities with the ability to recapitalize a failing
entity organized in such jurisdiction by writing down certain Investigations and proceedings initiated by these authorities
unsecured liabilities or converting certain unsecured liabilities may result in adverse judgments, settlements, fines, penalties,
into equity. Such “bail-in” powers are intended to enable the disgorgement, restitution, forfeiture, injunctions or other
recapitalization of a failing institution by allocating losses to relief, and have included and may in the future include
its shareholders and unsecured creditors. This may increase requirements that the Firm admit certain conduct, which may
the overall level of capital and liquidity required by us on a result in increased exposure to civil litigation. In addition,
consolidated basis and may result in limitations on our ability these measures have caused and may in the future cause
to efficiently distribute capital and liquidity among our collateral consequences. For example, such matters could
affiliated entities, including in times of stress. Non-U.S. impact our ability to engage in, or impose limitations on,
regulators are also considering requirements that certain certain of our businesses.
subsidiaries of large financial institutions maintain minimum
amounts of TLAC that would pass losses up from the As part of the resolution of certain investigations and
subsidiaries to the Parent Company and, ultimately, to proceedings, the Firm has been and may in the future be
security holders of the Parent Company in the event of failure. required to undertake certain measures and failure to do so
may result in adverse consequences, such as further
We may be prevented from paying dividends or taking other investigations or proceedings—both civil and criminal—and
capital actions because of regulatory constraints or revised additional penalties, fines, judgments or other relief.
regulatory capital requirements.
The Dodd-Frank Act also provides compensation to
We are subject to comprehensive consolidated supervision,
whistleblowers who present the SEC or CFTC with
regulation and examination by the Federal Reserve, including
information related to securities or commodities law
with respect to regulatory capital requirements, stress testing
violations that leads to a successful enforcement action. As a
and capital planning. We submit, on at least an annual basis, a
result of this compensation, it is possible we could face an
capital plan to the Federal Reserve describing proposed
increased number of investigations by the SEC or CFTC.
dividend payments to shareholders, proposed repurchases of
our outstanding securities and other proposed capital actions
We have been named, from time to time, as a defendant in
that we intend to take. Our ability to take capital actions
various legal actions, including arbitrations, class actions and
described in the capital plan is dependent on, among other
other litigation, as well as investigations or proceedings
factors, the results of supervisory stress tests conducted by the
brought by regulatory agencies, arising in connection with our
Federal Reserve and our compliance with regulatory capital
activities as a global diversified financial services institution.
requirements imposed by the Federal Reserve.
Certain of the actual or threatened legal or regulatory actions
include claims for substantial compensatory and/or punitive
In addition, the Federal Reserve may change regulatory
damages or claims for indeterminate amounts of damages, or
capital requirements to impose higher requirements that
may result in material penalties, fines or other results adverse
restrict our ability to take capital actions or may modify or
to us.
impose other regulatory standards or restrictions that increase
our operating expenses or constrain our ability to take capital
In some cases, the third-party entities that would otherwise be
actions. For additional information, see “Management’s
the primary defendants in such cases are bankrupt, in financial
Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results
distress or may not honor applicable indemnification
of Operations—Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
December 2023 Form 10-K 20Table of Contents
obligations. In other cases, including antitrust litigation, we occur and could adversely affect our businesses and
may be subject to claims for joint and several liability with reputation.
other defendants for treble damages or other relief related to
alleged conspiracies involving other institutions. Like any Our regulators also have the ability to scrutinize our activities
large corporation, we are also subject to risk from potential for potential conflicts of interest, including through detailed
employee misconduct, including noncompliance with examinations of specific transactions. For example, our status
policies, laws, rules and regulations, and improper use or as a BHC supervised by the Federal Reserve subjects us to
disclosure of confidential information, or improper sales direct Federal Reserve scrutiny with respect to transactions
practices or other conduct. between our U.S. Bank Subsidiaries and their affiliates.
Further, the Volcker Rule subjects us to regulatory scrutiny
We may be responsible for representations and warranties regarding certain transactions between us and our clients.
associated with commercial and residential real estate loans
and may incur losses in excess of our reserves. Risk Management
We originate loans secured by commercial and residential Our risk management strategies, models and processes may
properties. Further, we securitize and trade in a wide range of not be fully effective in mitigating our risk exposures in all
commercial and residential real estate and real estate-related market environments or against all types of risk, which
assets and products. In connection with these activities, we could result in unexpected losses.
have provided, or otherwise agreed to be responsible for,
We have devoted significant resources to develop our risk
certain representations and warranties. Under certain
management capabilities and expect to continue to do so in
circumstances, we may be required to repurchase such assets
the future. Nonetheless, our risk management strategies,
or make other payments related to such assets if such
models and processes, including our use of various risk
representations and warranties were breached, and may incur
models for assessing market, credit, liquidity and operational
losses as a result. We have also made representations and
exposures and hedging strategies, stress testing and other
warranties in connection with our role as an originator of
analysis, may not be fully effective in mitigating our risk
certain loans that we securitized in CMBS and RMBS. For
exposure in all market environments or against all types of
additional information, see Note 14 to the financial
risk, including risks that are unidentified or unanticipated.
statements.
As our businesses change and grow, including through
A failure to address conflicts of interest appropriately could
acquisitions and the introduction and application of new
adversely affect our businesses and reputation.
technologies, such as artificial intelligence, and the markets in
As a global financial services firm that provides products and which we operate evolve, our risk management strategies,
services to a large and diversified group of clients, including models and processes may not always adapt with those
corporations, governments, financial institutions and changes. Some of our methods of managing risk are based
individuals, we face potential conflicts of interest in the upon our use of observed historical market behavior and
normal course of business. For example, potential conflicts management’s judgment. As a result, these methods may not
can occur when there is a divergence of interests between us predict future risk exposures, which could be significantly
and a client, among clients, between an employee on the one greater than the historical measures indicate.
hand and us or a client on the other, or situations in which we
In addition, many models we use are based on assumptions or
may be a creditor of a client. Moreover, we utilize multiple
inputs regarding correlations among prices of various asset
brands and business channels, including those resulting from
classes or other market indicators and, therefore, cannot
our acquisitions, and continue to enhance the collaboration
anticipate sudden, unanticipated, or unidentified market or
across business segments, which may heighten the potential
economic movements, such as the impact of a pandemic or a
conflicts of interest or the risk of improper sharing of
sudden geopolitical conflict, which could cause us to incur
information.
losses.
We have policies, procedures and controls that are designed to
Management of market, credit, liquidity, operational, model,
identify and address potential conflicts of interest, and we
legal, regulatory and compliance risks requires, among other
utilize various measures, such as the use of disclosure, to
things, policies and procedures to record properly and verify a
manage these potential conflicts. However, identifying and
large number of transactions and events, and these policies
mitigating potential conflicts of interest can be complex and
and procedures may not be fully effective. Our trading risk
challenging and can become the focus of media and
management strategies and techniques also seek to balance
regulatory scrutiny. Indeed, actions that merely appear to
our ability to profit from trading positions with our exposure
create a conflict can put our reputation at risk even if the
to potential losses.
likelihood of an actual conflict has been mitigated. It is
possible that potential conflicts could give rise to litigation or
While we employ a broad and diversified set of risk
enforcement actions, which may lead to our clients being less
monitoring and risk mitigation techniques, those techniques
willing to enter into transactions in which a conflict may
and the judgments that accompany their application cannot
21 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
anticipate every economic and financial outcome or the in reputational harm as a result of public sentiment, legislative
timing of such outcomes. For example, to the extent that our and regulatory scrutiny (including from U.S. federal and state
trading or investing activities involve less liquid trading governments and foreign policymakers and regulators),
markets or are otherwise subject to restrictions on sales or litigation and reduced investor and stakeholder confidence. If
hedging, we may not be able to reduce our positions and, we are unable to achieve our objectives relating to climate
therefore, reduce our risk associated with such positions. We change or our current response to climate change is perceived
may, therefore, incur losses in the course of our trading or to be ineffective or insufficient, or the way we respond is
investing activities. For more information on how we monitor perceived negatively, our business and reputation may suffer.
and manage market and certain other risks and related
strategies, models and processes, see “Quantitative and The risks associated with, and the perspective of regulators,
Qualitative Disclosures about Risk—Market Risk.” governments, shareholders, employees and other stakeholders
regarding, climate change, as well as geopolitical events,
Climate change manifesting as physical or transition risks continue to evolve rapidly, making it difficult to assess the
could result in increased costs and risks and adversely affect ultimate impact on us of climate-related risks and
our operations, businesses and clients. uncertainties. As climate risk is interconnected with other
risks, we have developed and continue to enhance processes
There continues to be increasing concern over the risks of to embed climate risk considerations into our risk
climate change and related environmental sustainability management practices and governance structures. Despite our
matters. The physical risks of climate change include harm to risk management practices, the unpredictability surrounding
people and property arising from acute, climate-related the timing and severity of climate-related events and societal
events, such as floods, hurricanes, heatwaves, droughts, and or political changes in reaction to them make it difficult to
wildfires and chronic, longer-term shifts in climate patterns, predict, identify, monitor and mitigate climate risks.
such as higher global average temperatures, rising sea levels
and long-term droughts. Such events could disrupt our In addition, the methodologies and data used to manage and
operations or those of our clients or third parties on which we monitor climate risk continue to evolve. Current approaches
rely, including through direct damage to physical assets and utilize information and estimates that have been derived from
indirect impacts from supply chain disruption and market information or factors released by third-party sources, which
volatility. These events could impact the ability of certain of may not reflect the latest or most accurate data. Climate-
our clients or customers to repay their obligations, reduce the related data, particularly greenhouse gas emissions for clients
value of collateral, increase costs, including the cost or and counterparties, remains limited in availability and varies
availability of insurance coverage, and result in other adverse in quality. Certain third-party information may also change
effects. over time as methodologies evolve and are refined. While we
believe this information is the best available at the time, we
The transition risks of climate change include policy, legal, may only be able to complete limited validation. Furthermore,
technology and market changes. Examples of these transition modeling capabilities and methodologies to analyze climate-
risks include changes in consumer and business sentiment, related risks, although improving, remain nascent and
related technologies, shareholder preferences and any emerging. These and other factors could cause results to differ
additional regulatory and legislative requirements, including materially, which could impact our ability to manage climate-
increased disclosure or carbon taxes. These risks could related risks.
increase our expenses and adversely impact our strategies,
including by limiting our ability to pursue certain business Replacement or reform of certain interest rate benchmarks
activities or offer certain products and services. Negative could adversely affect our business, securities, financial
impacts to certain of our clients, such as decreased condition and results of operations.
profitability and asset write-downs, could also lead to
increased credit, counterparty and liquidity risk to us. Central banks around the world, including the Federal
Reserve, have sponsored initiatives in recent years to replace
In addition, our reputation and client relationships may be LIBOR and replace or reform certain other interest rate
adversely impacted as a result of our, or our clients’, benchmarks (collectively, the “IBORs”). A transition away
involvement in certain practices that may have, or are from use of the IBORs to alternative rates and other potential
associated with having, an adverse impact on climate change. interest rate benchmark reforms has been underway for a
Legislative or regulatory change regarding climate-related number of years.
risks, including inconsistent requirements and uncertainties,
These reforms have caused and may in the future cause such
could result in loss of revenue, or increased credit, market,
rates to perform differently than in the past, or to cease
liquidity, regulatory, compliance, reputational and other risks
entirely, or have other consequences that are contrary to
and costs.
market expectations.
Our ability to achieve our climate-related targets and
The ongoing market transition away from these interest rate
commitments and the way we go about this could also result
benchmarks to alternative reference rates is complex and
December 2023 Form 10-K 22Table of Contents
could have a range of adverse impacts on our business, and other companies offering financial and ancillary services
securities, financial condition and results of operations, in the U.S. and globally, including, in certain instances,
including: through the internet. We also compete with companies that
provide online trading and banking services, investment
• Adversely impacting the pricing, liquidity, value of, return advisory services, robo-advice capabilities, access to digital
on and trading for a broad array of financial products, asset capabilities and services, and other financial products
including any securities, loans and derivatives that are and services. We compete on the basis of several factors,
included in our financial assets and liabilities that are linked including transaction execution, capital or access to capital,
to these interest rate benchmarks; products and services, innovation, technology, reputation, risk
• Inquiries, reviews or other actions from regulators in appetite and price.
respect of our (or the market’s) preparation, readiness,
transition plans and actions regarding the replacement of a Over time, certain sectors of the financial services industry
legacy interest rate benchmark with one or more alternative have become more concentrated, as institutions involved in a
reference rates; broad range of financial services have left businesses, been
• Disputes, litigation or other actions with clients, acquired by or merged into other firms, or have declared
counterparties and investors in various scenarios, such as bankruptcy. Such changes could result in our remaining
regarding the interpretation and enforceability of provisions competitors gaining greater capital and other resources, such
in IBOR-based products such as fallback language or other as the ability to offer a broader range of products and services
related provisions, including in the case of fallbacks to the and geographic diversity, or new competitors may emerge.
alternative reference rates, any economic, legal, operational
or other impact resulting from the fundamental differences We have experienced and may continue to experience pricing
between the IBORs and the various alternative reference pressures as a result of these factors and as some of our
rates or regarding the interpretation of applicable competitors seek to obtain market share by reducing prices,
legislation, regulations or rules; and eliminating commissions or other fees, or providing more
• Causing us to incur additional costs in relation to any of the favorable terms of business. In addition, certain of our
above factors. competitors may be subject to different and, in some cases,
less stringent, legal and regulatory regimes than we are,
Other factors include the pace of the transition to the thereby putting us at a competitive disadvantage. Some new
alternative reference rates, timing mismatches between cash competitors in the financial technology sector have sought to
and derivative markets, the specific terms and parameters for target existing segments of our businesses that could be
and market acceptance of any alternative reference rate, susceptible to disruption by innovative or less regulated
market conventions for the use of any alternative reference business models. For more information regarding the
rate in connection with a particular product (including the competitive environment in which we operate, see “Business
timing and market adoption of any conventions proposed or —Competition” and “Business—Supervision and
recommended by any industry or other group), prices of and Regulation.”
the liquidity of trading markets for products based on
alternative reference rates, and our ability to further transition Automated trading markets and the introduction and
and develop appropriate systems and analytics for one or application of new technologies may adversely affect our
more alternative reference rates. business and may increase competition.
See also “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial We continue to experience price competition in some of our
Condition and Results of Operations—Regulatory businesses. In particular, the ability to execute securities,
Requirements—Regulatory Developments and Other derivatives and other financial instrument trades electronically
Matters.” on exchanges, swap execution facilities and other automated
trading platforms, and the introduction and application of new
Competitive Environment technologies, including generative artificial intelligence, will
likely continue the pressure on revenues. The trend toward
We face strong competition from financial services firms direct access to automated, electronic markets will likely
and others, which could lead to pricing pressures that could continue as additional markets move to more automated
materially adversely affect our revenues and profitability. trading platforms. We have experienced and will likely
continue to experience competitive pressures in these and
The financial services industry and all aspects of our
other areas in the future.
businesses are intensely competitive, and we expect them to
remain so. We compete with commercial banks, investment Our ability to retain and attract qualified employees is
banking firms, brokerage firms, insurance companies, critical to the success of our business and the failure to do
exchanges, electronic trading and clearing platforms, financial so may materially adversely affect our performance.
data repositories, investment advisers and sponsors of mutual
funds, hedge funds, real assets funds and private credit and Our people are our most important asset. We compete with
equity funds, energy companies, financial technology firms various other companies in attracting and retaining qualified
23 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
and skilled personnel. If we are unable to continue to attract, Various emerging market countries have experienced severe
integrate and retain highly qualified employees or political, economic or financial disruptions, including
successfully transition key roles, or do so at levels or in forms significant devaluations of their currencies, defaults or
necessary to maintain our competitive position, our potential defaults on sovereign debt, capital and currency
performance, including our competitive position and results of exchange controls, high rates of inflation and low or negative
operations, could be materially adversely affected. Our ability growth rates in their economies. Crime and corruption, as
to attract and retain qualified and skilled personnel depends well as issues of security and personal safety, also exist in
on numerous factors, some of which are outside of our certain of these countries. These conditions could adversely
control. impact our businesses and increase volatility in financial
markets generally.
Compensation costs required to attract and retain employees
may increase or the competitive market for talent may further A disease pandemic, such as COVID-19 and its variants, or
intensify due to factors such as low unemployment, a strong other widespread health emergencies, natural disasters,
job market and changes in employees’ expectations, concerns climate-related incidents, terrorist activities or military
and preferences. The financial industry has experienced and actions, or social or political tensions, could create economic
may continue to experience more stringent regulation of and financial disruptions in emerging markets or in other
employee compensation than other industries, which may or areas of the global economy that could adversely affect our
may not impact competitors. These more stringent regulations businesses, or could lead to operational difficulties, including
have shaped our compensation practices, which could have an travel limitations and supply chain complications, that could
adverse effect on our ability to hire or retain the most impair our ability to manage or conduct our businesses around
qualified employees. the world.
International Risk As a U.S. company, we are required to comply with the
economic sanctions and embargo programs administered by
We are subject to numerous political, economic, legal, tax, OFAC and similar multinational bodies and governmental
operational, franchise and other risks as a result of our agencies worldwide, which may be inconsistent with local
international operations that could adversely impact our law. We and certain of our subsidiaries are also subject to
businesses in many ways. applicable AML and/or anti-corruption laws in the U.S., as
well as in the jurisdictions in which we operate, including the
We are subject to numerous political, economic, legal, tax,
Bank Secrecy Act, the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act and
operational, franchise and other risks that are inherent in
the U.K. Bribery Act. A violation of a sanction, embargo
operating in many countries, including risks of possible
program, AML or anti-corruption law could subject us, and
nationalization, expropriation, price controls, capital controls,
individual employees, to a regulatory enforcement action, as
exchange controls, increased taxes and levies, minimum
well as significant civil and criminal penalties.
global tax regimes, cybersecurity, data transfer and
outsourcing restrictions, regulatory scrutiny regarding the use Acquisition, Divestiture and Joint Venture Risk
of new technologies, prohibitions on certain types of foreign
and capital market activities, limitations on cross-border We may be unable to fully capture the expected value from
listings and other restrictive governmental actions, as well as acquisitions, divestitures, joint ventures, partnerships,
the outbreak of hostilities or political and governmental minority stakes or strategic alliances, and certain
instability, including tensions between China and the U.S., the acquisitions may subject our business to new or increased
expansion or escalation of hostilities between Russia and risk.
Ukraine or in the Middle East or the initiation or escalation of
hostilities or terrorist activity around the world and the In connection with past or future acquisitions, divestitures,
potential associated impacts on global and local economies joint ventures, partnerships, minority stakes or strategic
and our operations. In many countries, the laws and alliances (including with Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group,
regulations applicable to the securities and financial services Inc. (“MUFG”)), we face numerous risks and uncertainties in
industries and multinational corporations are uncertain, combining, transferring, separating or integrating the relevant
evolving and subject to sudden change or may be inconsistent businesses and systems that may present operational and other
with U.S. law. It may also be difficult for us to determine the risks, including the need to combine or separate accounting,
exact requirements of local laws in every market or adapt to data processing and other systems, management controls and
changes in law, which could adversely impact our businesses. legal entities, and to integrate relationships with clients,
Our inability to remain in compliance with local laws in a trading counterparties and business partners. Certain of these
particular market could have a significant and negative effect strategic initiatives, and integration thereof, may cause us to
not only on our business in that market but also on our incur incremental expenses and may also require incremental
reputation generally. We are also subject to the risk that financial, management and other resources.
transactions we structure might not be legally enforceable in
In the case of joint ventures, partnerships and minority stakes,
all cases.
we are subject to additional risks and uncertainties because
December 2023 Form 10-K 24Table of Contents
we may be dependent upon, and subject to liability, losses or
reputational damage relating to systems, controls and
personnel that are not under our control, and conflicts or
disagreements between us and any of our joint venture
partners or partners may negatively impact the benefits to be
achieved by the relevant joint venture or partnership,
respectively.
There is no assurance that any of our acquisitions, divestitures
or investments will be successfully integrated or
disaggregated or yield all of the positive benefits and
synergies anticipated. If we are not able to integrate or
disaggregate successfully our past and future acquisitions or
dispositions, including aligning the processes, policies and
procedures of the acquired entities with our standards, there is
a risk that our results of operations, financial condition and
cash flows may be materially and adversely affected.
Certain of our business initiatives, including expansions of
existing businesses, may change our client or account profile
or bring us into contact, directly or indirectly, with individuals
and entities that are not within our traditional client and
counterparty base and may expose us to new asset classes,
services, competitors and new markets. These business
activities expose us to new and enhanced risks, greater
regulatory scrutiny of these activities, increased credit-related,
sovereign, compliance and operational risks, as well as
franchise and reputational concerns regarding the manner in
which these assets are being operated or held, or services are
being delivered.
For more information regarding the regulatory environment in
which we operate, see also “Business—Supervision and
Regulation.”
25 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Cybersecurity strategy. This information is also provided to an internal
forensics team, which develops and implements technologies
Risk management and strategy designed to help detect these cybersecurity threats across our
environment. Where a potential threat is identified in our
We, our businesses, and the broader financial services environment, our incident response team evaluates the
industry face an increasingly complex and evolving threat potential impact to the Firm and coordinates remediation
environment. We have made and continue to make substantial where required. These groups, as well as the Operational Risk
investments in cybersecurity and fraud prevention technology, Department, review external cybersecurity incidents that may
and employ experienced talent to lead our Cybersecurity and be relevant to the Firm, and the outcomes of these incidents
Information Security organizations and program under the further inform the design of our Cybersecurity Program. In
oversight of our Board of Directors (“Board”) and the addition, we maintain a robust global training program on
Operations and Technology Committee of the Board cybersecurity risks and requirements and conduct regular
(“BOTC”). See “Risk Factors—Operational Risk” for phishing email simulations for our employees and
information on risks to the Firm from cybersecurity threats. consultants.
As part of our enterprise risk management (“ERM”) Our processes are designed to help oversee, identify and
framework, we have implemented and maintain a program to mitigate cybersecurity risks associated with our use of third-
assess, identify and manage risks arising from the party vendors. We maintain a third-party risk management
cybersecurity threats confronting the Firm (“Cybersecurity program that includes evaluation of, and response to,
Program”). Our Cybersecurity Program helps protect our cybersecurity risks at our third-party vendors. Prior to
clients, customers, employees, property, products, services engaging third-party vendors to provide services to the Firm,
and reputation by seeking to preserve the confidentiality, we conduct assessments of the third-party vendors’
integrity and availability of information, enable the secure cybersecurity programs to identify the impact of their services
delivery of financial services, and protect the business and the on the cybersecurity risks to the Firm. Once on-boarded,
safe operation of our technology systems. We continually third-party vendors’ cybersecurity programs are subject to
adjust our Cybersecurity Program to address the evolving risk-based oversight, which may include security
cybersecurity threat landscape and comply with extensive questionnaires, submission of independent security audit
legal and regulatory expectations. reports or a Firm audit of the third-party vendor’s security
program, and, with limited exceptions, third-party vendors are
Processes for assessing, identifying and managing material
required to meet our cybersecurity standards. Where a third-
risks from cybersecurity threats
party vendor cannot meet those standards, its services, and the
residual risk to the Firm, are subject to review, challenge and
Our Cybersecurity Program takes into account industry best
escalation through our risk management processes and ERM
practices and addresses risks from cybersecurity threats to our
committees, which may ultimately result in requesting
network, infrastructure, computing environment and the third
increased security measures or ceasing engagement with such
parties that we rely on. We periodically assess the design of
third-party vendor.
our cybersecurity controls against the Cyber Risk Institute
Cyber Profile, which is based on the National Institute of
Our Cybersecurity Program is regularly assessed by the
Standards and Technology (“NIST”) Cybersecurity
Internal Audit Department (“IAD”) through various assurance
Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure
activities, with the results reported to the Audit Committee of
Cybersecurity, as well as global cybersecurity regulations,
the Board (“BAC”) and the BOTC. Annually, certain
and develop improvements to those controls in response to
elements of the Cybersecurity Program are subject to an audit
that assessment. Our Cybersecurity Program also includes
by an independent consultant, as well as an assessment by a
cybersecurity and information security policies, procedures
separate, independent third party, the results of which,
and technologies that are designed to address regulatory
including opportunities identified for improvement and
requirements and protect our clients’, employees’ and own
related remediation plans, are reviewed with the BOTC. Our
data against unauthorized disclosure, modification and
Cybersecurity Program is also examined regularly by the
misuse. These policies, procedures and technologies cover a
Firm’s prudential and conduct regulators within the scope of
broad range of areas, including: identification of internal and
their jurisdiction.
external threats, access control, data security, protective
controls, detection of malicious or unauthorized activity, Governance
incident response, and recovery planning.
Management’s role in assessing and managing material
Our threat intelligence function within the Cybersecurity risks from cybersecurity threats
Program actively engages in private and public information
sharing communities and leverages both commercial and Our Cybersecurity Program is operated and maintained by
proprietary products to collect a wide variety of industry and management, including the Chief Information Officer of
governmental information regarding the latest cybersecurity Cyber, Data, Risk and Resilience (“CIO”) and the Chief
threats, which informs our cybersecurity risk assessments and Information Security Officer (“CISO”). These senior officers
December 2023 Form 10-K 26Table of Contents
are responsible for assessing and managing the Firm’s Department (“Operations”); and (iii) the Non-Financial Risk
cybersecurity risks. Our Cybersecurity Program strategy, Management Department (“NFR”). Such reporting includes
which is set by the CISO and overseen by the Head of updates on our Cybersecurity Program, risks from
Operational Risk, is informed by various risk and control cybersecurity threats, our programs to address and mitigate
assessments, control testing, external assessments, threat the risks associated with the evolving cybersecurity threat
intelligence, and public and private information sharing. Our environment, and the Operational Risk Department’s
Cybersecurity Program also includes processes for escalating assessment of cybersecurity risks. Senior officers in
and considering the materiality of incidents that impact the Technology and NFR also provide an annual report to the
Firm, including escalation to senior management and the BOTC on the status of our Cybersecurity Program, including
Board, which are periodically tested through tabletop a discussion of risks arising from cybersecurity threats, in
exercises. compliance with the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. At least
annually, these senior management representatives discuss the
The members of management that lead our Cybersecurity status of the Cybersecurity Program and key cybersecurity
Program and strategy have extensive experience in risks with the Board. The BOTC also receives an annual
technology, cybersecurity and information security. The CIO independent assessment of key aspects of our Cybersecurity
has over 30 years of experience in various engineering, IT, Program from an external party and holds joint meetings with
operations and information security roles. The CISO has over the BAC and Risk Committee of the Board (“BRC”), as
25 years of experience leading cybersecurity teams at necessary and appropriate. In addition, members of the BOTC
financial institutions, including in the areas of IT strategy, risk periodically participate in incident response tabletop exercises
management and information security. The Head of and the BOTC periodically receives reports from incident
Operational Risk has over 20 years of experience in response tabletop exercises performed by and for
technology, security and compliance roles, including management.
experience in government security agencies.
At least annually, the BOTC or the Board reviews and
Risk levels and mitigating measures are presented to and approves the Global Cybersecurity Program Policy, the
monitored by dedicated management-level cybersecurity risk Global Information Security Program Policy, the Global
committees. These committees include representatives from Third-Party Risk Management Policy, and the Global
Firm management as well as business and control Technology Policy. The chair of the BOTC regularly reports
stakeholders who review, challenge and, where appropriate, to the Board on risks from cybersecurity threats and other
consider exceptions to our policies and procedures. matters reviewed by the BOTC. In accordance with the
Significant cybersecurity risks are escalated from these Board’s Corporate Governance Policies, all Board members
committees to our Non-Financial Risk Committee. The CIO are invited to attend BOTC meetings and have access to
and the Head of Operational Risk report on the status of our meeting materials.
Cybersecurity Program, including significant cybersecurity
risks; review metrics related to the program; and discuss the Senior management, including the senior officers mentioned
status of regulatory and remedial actions and incidents to the above, discuss cybersecurity developments with the chair of
Firm Risk Committee, the BOTC and the Board, as the BOTC between Board and committee meetings, as
appropriate. For more information regarding the Firm’s ERM necessary. The BOTC meets regularly in executive session
framework, see “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures with management, including the Head of NFR, and senior
about Risk—Risk Management.” officers from Technology and Operations.
Board of Directors’ oversight of risks from cybersecurity
threats
As discussed above, material cybersecurity risks are
addressed by management-level ERM committees with
escalation to the BOTC and Board, as appropriate. The BOTC
has primary responsibility for assisting the Board in its
oversight of significant operational risk exposures of the Firm
and its business units, including IT, information security,
fraud, third-party oversight, business disruption and
resilience, and cybersecurity risks (including review of
cybersecurity risks against established risk management
methodologies) and the steps management has taken to
monitor and control such exposures.
In accordance with its charter, the BOTC receives quarterly
reports from (i) the Technology Department (“Technology”),
including the CIO or the CISO; (ii) the Operations
27 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Introduction
Morgan Stanley is a global financial services firm that Investment Management provides a broad range of
maintains significant market positions in each of its business investment strategies and products that span geographies,
segments—Institutional Securities, Wealth Management and asset classes, and public and private markets to a diverse
Investment Management. Morgan Stanley, through its group of clients across institutional and intermediary
subsidiaries and affiliates, provides a wide variety of products channels. Strategies and products, which are offered
and services to a large and diversified group of clients and through a variety of investment vehicles, include equity,
customers, including corporations, governments, financial fixed income, alternatives and solutions, and liquidity and
institutions and individuals. Unless the context otherwise overlay services. Institutional clients include defined
requires, the terms “Morgan Stanley,” “Firm,” “us,” “we” or benefit/defined contribution plans, foundations,
“our” mean Morgan Stanley (the “Parent Company”) together endowments, government entities, sovereign wealth funds,
with its consolidated subsidiaries. See the “Glossary of insurance companies, third-party fund sponsors and
Common Terms and Acronyms” for the definition of certain corporations. Individual clients are generally served
terms and acronyms used throughout this Form 10-K. For an through intermediaries, including affiliated and non-
analysis of 2022 results compared with 2021 results, see Part affiliated distributors.
II, Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of
Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in the annual Management’s Discussion and Analysis includes certain
report on Form 10-K for the year-ended December 31, 2022 metrics that we believe to be useful to us, investors, analysts
filed with the SEC. and other stakeholders by providing further transparency
about, or an additional means of assessing, our financial
A description of the clients and principal products and condition and operating results. Such metrics, when used, are
services of each of our business segments is as follows: defined and may be different from or inconsistent with
metrics used by other companies.
Institutional Securities provides a variety of products and
services to corporations, governments, financial institutions The results of operations in the past have been, and in the
and ultra-high net worth clients. Investment Banking future may continue to be, materially affected by:
services consist of capital raising and financial advisory competition; risk factors; legislative, legal and regulatory
services, including the underwriting of debt, equity developments; and other factors. These factors also may have
securities and other products, as well as advice on mergers an adverse impact on our ability to achieve our strategic
and acquisitions, restructurings and project finance. Our objectives. Additionally, the discussion of our results of
Equity and Fixed Income businesses include sales, operations herein may contain forward-looking statements.
financing, prime brokerage, market-making, Asia wealth These statements, which reflect management’s beliefs and
management services and certain business-related expectations, are subject to risks and uncertainties that may
investments. Lending activities include originating cause actual results to differ materially. For a discussion of
corporate loans and commercial real estate loans, providing the risks and uncertainties that may affect our future results,
secured lending facilities, and extending securities-based see “Forward-Looking Statements,” “Business—
and other financing to customers. Other activities include Competition,” “Business—Supervision and Regulation,”
research. “Risk Factors” and “Liquidity and Capital Resources—
Regulatory Requirements” herein.
Wealth Management provides a comprehensive array of
financial services and solutions to individual investors and
small to medium-sized businesses and institutions covering:
financial advisor-led brokerage, custody, administrative and
investment advisory services; self-directed brokerage
services; financial and wealth planning services; workplace
services, including stock plan administration; securities-
based lending, residential real estate loans and other lending
products; banking; and retirement plan services.
December 2023 Form 10-K 28Table of Contents
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Executive Summary
Net Revenues
($ in millions)
Overview of Financial Results
Consolidated Results—Full Year Ended December 31, 2023
• The Firm reported net revenues of $54.1 billion and net
income of $9.1 billion against a mixed market backdrop
and a number of headwinds. $59,755
$53,668 $54,143
• The Firm delivered ROE of 9.4% and ROTCE of 12.8%
(see “Selected Non-GAAP Financial Information” herein).
• The Firm expense efficiency ratio was 77%. The ratio was
negatively impacted by severance costs of $353 million, an 2021 2022 2023
FDIC special assessment of $286 million, higher legal
expenses relating to a specific matter of $249 million and Net Income Applicable to Morgan Stanley
($ in millions)
integration-related expenses of $293 million.
• At December 31, 2023, the Firm’s Standardized Common
Equity Tier 1 capital ratio was 15.2%.
• Institutional Securities reported net revenues of $23.1
billion reflecting lower completed activity in Investment $15,034
Banking and lower results in Equity and Fixed Income on
$11,029
reduced client activity and a less favorable market $9,087
environment compared to a year ago.
• Wealth Management delivered net revenues of $26.3
billion, reflecting mark-to-market gains on investments 2021 2022 2023
associated with certain employee deferred cash-based
compensation plans (“DCP investments”) compared with Earnings per Diluted Common Share
losses in the prior year and higher Net interest revenues.
The pre-tax margin was 24.9%. The business added net new
assets of $282.3 billion, representing a 6.7% annualized
growth rate from beginning period assets.
• Investment Management reported net revenues of $5.4
$8.03
billion and AUM increased to $1.5 trillion.
$6.15
$5.18
2021 2022 2023
2023 Compared with 2022
• We reported net revenues of $54.1 billion in 2023
compared with $53.7 billion in 2022. For 2023, net income
applicable to Morgan Stanley was $9.1 billion, or $5.18 per
diluted common share, compared with $11.0 billion, or
$6.15 per diluted common share in 2022.
29 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Non-Interest Expenses Business Segment Results
($ in millions)
$41,798 Net Revenues by Segment1
$40,083 $39,299 ($ in millions)
$59,755
$15,455 $16,246 $17,240 $6,220 $53,668 $54,143
$5,375 $5,370
$24,243
$24,417 $26,268
$24,628 $23,053 $24,558
$29,833
$24,393 $23,060
2021 2022 2023
Compensation and benefits expenses Non-compensation expenses
2021 2022 2023
• Compensation and benefits expenses of $24,558 million in Institutional Securities Wealth Management Investment Management
2023 increased 7% from the prior year, primarily due to
higher expenses related to certain employee deferred cash- Net Income Applicable to Morgan Stanley by Segment1
($ in millions)
based compensation plans linked to investment
performance (“DCP”) and higher salary expenses, partially $15,034
offset by lower expenses related to outstanding deferred
$1,347
equity compensation.
$11,029
$4,734
2023 Compensation and benefits expenses included $353 $660
$9,087
million of severance costs, primarily associated with the
$639
employee action recorded in the second quarter of 2023. $5,139
$5,022
• Non-compensation expenses of $17,240 million in 2023
$8,957
increased 6% from the prior year, primarily driven by an
FDIC special assessment of $286 million, increased spend $5,242
$3,453
on technology, higher costs related to exits of real estate
and higher legal expenses, including $249 million related to
2021 2022 2023
a specific matter.
Institutional Securities Wealth Management Investment Management
Provision for Credit Losses
1. The amounts in the charts represent the contribution of each business segment to
the total of the applicable financial category and may not sum to the total presented
on top of the bars due to intersegment eliminations. See Note 22 to the financial
The Provision for credit losses on loans and lending
statements for details of intersegment eliminations.
commitments of $532 million in 2023 was primarily related to
deteriorating conditions in the commercial real estate sector, • Institutional Securities net revenues of $23,060 million in
including provisions for certain specific loans, mainly in the 2023 decreased 5% from the prior year, primarily reflecting
office portfolio, and modest growth in certain other loan lower results across businesses.
portfolios. The Provision for credit losses on loans and
• Wealth Management net revenues of $26,268 million in
lending commitments of $280 million in 2022 was due to
2023 increased 8% from the prior year, primarily reflecting
portfolio growth and deterioration in the macroeconomic
gains on DCP investments compared with losses in the
outlook.
prior year and higher Net interest revenues.
For further information on the Provision for credit losses, see
• Investment Management net revenues of $5,370 million in
“Credit Risk” herein.
2023 were relatively unchanged from the prior year,
reflecting a decrease in Asset management and related fees
revenues offset by an increase in Performance based
income and other revenues.
December 2023 Form 10-K 30Table of Contents
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Net Revenues by Region1 At At
($ in millions) $ in millions, except per share data, worldwide December 31, December 31,
employees and client assets 2023 2022
$59,755 Average liquidity resources for three months
$53,668 $54,143 ended5 $ 314,504 $ 312,250
$7,451 Loans6 $ 226,828 $ 222,182
$7,699 $6,740 $6,434 Total assets $ 1,193,693 $ 1,180,231
$6,811 $6,058 Deposits $ 351,804 $ 356,646
Borrowings $ 263,732 $ 238,058
Common shareholders’ equity $ 90,288 $ 91,391
Tangible common shareholders’ equity3 $ 66,527 $ 67,123
$44,605 $40,117 $41,651 Common shares outstanding 1,627 1,675
Book value per common share7 $ 55.50 $ 54.55
Tangible book value per common share3,7 $ 40.89 $ 40.06
Worldwide employees (in thousands) 80 82
Client assets8 (in billions) $ 6,588 $ 5,492
2021 2022 2023
Capital ratios9
Americas EMEA Asia Common Equity Tier 1 capital—Standardized 15.2 % 15.3 %
1. For a discussion of how the geographic breakdown of net revenues is determined, Tier 1 capital—Standardized 17.1 % 17.2 %
see Note 22 to the financial statements. Common Equity Tier 1 capital—Advanced 15.5 % 15.6 %
Tier 1 capital—Advanced 17.4 % 17.6 %
• Americas net revenues in 2023 increased 4%, primarily
Tier 1 leverage 6.7 % 6.7 %
driven by results within the Wealth Management business
SLR 5.5 % 5.5 %
segment and Other net revenues within the Institutional
1. The expense efficiency ratio represents total non-interest expenses as a
Securities business segment, partially offset by lower
percentage of net revenues.
results across businesses within the Institutional Securities 2. ROE and ROTCE represent earnings applicable to Morgan Stanley common
shareholders as a percentage of average common equity and average tangible
business segment.
common equity, respectively.
3. Represents a non-GAAP financial measure. See “Selected Non-GAAP Financial
• EMEA net revenues in 2023 decreased 11%, primarily Information” herein.
4. Pre-tax margin represents income before provision for income taxes as a
driven by lower results across businesses within the percentage of net revenues.
Institutional Securities business segment. 5. For a discussion of Liquidity resources, see “Liquidity and Capital Resources—
Balance Sheet—Liquidity Risk Management Framework—Liquidity Resources”
herein.
• Asia net revenues in 2023 decreased 5%, primarily driven 6. Includes loans held for investment, net of ACL, loans held for sale and also includes
loans at fair value, which are included in Trading assets in the balance sheet.
by lower results across businesses within the Institutional 7. Book value per common share and tangible book value per common share equal
Securities business segment. common shareholders’ equity and tangible common shareholders’ equity,
respectively, divided by common shares outstanding.
8. Client assets represents Wealth Management client assets and Investment
Selected Financial Information and Other Statistical Data Management AUM. Certain Wealth Management client assets are invested in
Investment Management products and are also included in Investment
$ in millions, except per share data 2023 2022 2021 Management’s AUM.
Consolidated results 9. For a discussion of our capital ratios, see “Liquidity and Capital Resources—
Net revenues $ 54,143 $ 53,668 $ 59,755 Regulatory Requirements” herein.
Earnings applicable to Morgan Stanley Economic and Market Conditions
common shareholders $ 8,530 $ 10,540 $ 14,566
Earnings per diluted common share $ 5.18 $ 6.15 $ 8.03
The market environment in 2023 remained mixed,
Consolidated financial measures characterized by inflationary pressures and uncertainty
Expense efficiency ratio1 77 % 73 % 67 % regarding the future path of interest rates, which remained
ROE2 9.4 % 11.2 % 15.0 % persistently high. Towards the end of the year, the market
ROTCE2,3 12.8 % 15.3 % 19.8 % environment improved from prior quarters with the
Pre-tax margin4 22 % 26 % 33 %
expectation of lower interest rates going into 2024. However,
Effective tax rate 21.9 % 20.7 % 23.1 %
there is continued uncertainty regarding the timing and pace
Pre-tax margin by segment4
of these rate reductions along with concerns regarding
Institutional Securities 19 % 28 % 40 %
heightened geopolitical risks that could impact the capital
Wealth Management 25 % 27 % 25 %
markets in 2024. The market environment impacted our
Investment Management 16 % 15 % 27 %
businesses in 2023, as discussed further in “Business
Segments” herein, and, to the extent that it continues to
remain uncertain, could adversely impact client confidence
and related activity.
For more information on economic and market conditions,
and the potential effects of geopolitical events and acts of war
or aggression on our future results, refer to “Risk Factors” and
“Forward-Looking Statements.”
31 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Selected Non-GAAP Financial Information may not be material to our Income before provision for
income taxes in any individual period, it may impact the
We prepare our financial statements using U.S. GAAP. From Wealth Management business segment reported ratios and
time to time, we may disclose certain “non-GAAP financial operating metrics in certain periods due to potentially
measures” in this document or in the course of our earnings significant impacts to net revenues and compensation
releases, earnings and other conference calls, financial expenses. For additional information on DCP, refer to “Other
presentations, definitive proxy statements and other public Matters” herein.
disclosures. A “non-GAAP financial measure” excludes, or
includes, amounts from the most directly comparable measure The principal non-GAAP financial measures presented in this
calculated and presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP. We document are set forth in the following tables.
consider the non-GAAP financial measures we disclose to be
useful to us, investors, analysts and other stakeholders by Reconciliations from U.S. GAAP to Non-GAAP Consolidated
Financial Measures
providing further transparency about, or an alternate means of
assessing or comparing our financial condition, operating $ in millions 2023 2022 2021
results and capital adequacy. Net revenues $ 54,143 $ 53,668 $ 59,755
Adjustment for mark-to-market losses
(gains) on DCP1 (434) 1,198 (389)
These measures are not in accordance with, or a substitute for,
Adjusted Net revenues—non-GAAP $ 53,709 $ 54,866 $ 59,366
U.S. GAAP and may be different from or inconsistent with
Compensation expense $ 24,558 $ 23,053 $ 24,628
non-GAAP financial measures used by other companies.
Adjustment for mark-to-market losses
Whenever we refer to a non-GAAP financial measure, we will (gains) on DCP1 (668) 716 (526)
also generally define it or present the most directly Adjusted Compensation expense—non-
GAAP $ 23,890 $ 23,769 $ 24,102
comparable financial measure calculated and presented in
Wealth Management Net revenues $ 26,268 $ 24,417 $ 24,243
accordance with U.S. GAAP, along with a reconciliation of
Adjustment for mark-to-market losses
the differences between the U.S. GAAP financial measure and (gains) on DCP1 (282) 858 (210)
the non-GAAP financial measure. Adjusted Wealth Management Net revenues
—non-GAAP $ 25,986 $ 25,275 $ 24,033
Wealth Management Compensation
We present certain non-GAAP financial measures that expense $ 13,972 $ 12,534 $ 13,090
exclude the impact of mark-to-market gains and losses on Adjustment for mark-to-market losses
(gains) on DCP1 (412) 530 (293)
DCP investments from net revenues and compensation
Adjusted Wealth Management
expenses. The impact of DCP is primarily reflected in our Compensation expense—non-GAAP $ 13,560 $ 13,064 $ 12,797
Wealth Management business segment results. These
measures allow for better comparability of period-to-period At December 31,
underlying operating performance and revenue trends, $ in millions 2023 2022 2021
Tangible equity
especially in our Wealth Management business segment. By
Common shareholders’ equity $ 90,288 $ 91,391 $ 97,691
excluding the impact of these items, we are better able to
Less: Goodwill and net intangible assets (23,761) (24,268) (25,192)
describe the business drivers and resulting impact to net
Tangible common shareholders’ equity—
revenues and corresponding change to the associated non-GAAP $ 66,527 $ 67,123 $ 72,499
compensation expenses.
Average Monthly Balance
$ in millions 2023 2022 2021
Compensation expense for DCP awards is calculated based on
Tangible equity
the notional value of the award granted, adjusted for changes
Common shareholders’ equity $ 90,819 $ 93,873 $ 97,094
in the fair value of the referenced investments that employees
Less: Goodwill and net intangible assets (24,013) (24,789) (23,392)
select. Compensation expense is recognized over the vesting Tangible common shareholders’ equity—
period relevant to each separately vesting portion of deferred non-GAAP $ 66,806 $ 69,084 $ 73,702
awards.
We invest directly, as principal, in financial instruments and
other investments to economically hedge certain of our
obligations under these DCP awards. Changes in the fair
value of such investments, net of financing costs, are recorded
in net revenues, and included in Transactional revenues in the
Wealth Management business segment. Although changes in
compensation expense resulting from changes in the fair value
of the referenced investments will generally be offset by
changes in the fair value of investments recognized in net
revenues, there is typically a timing difference between the
immediate recognition of gains and losses on our investments
and the deferred recognition of the related compensation
expense over the vesting period. While this timing difference
December 2023 Form 10-K 32Table of Contents
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Non-GAAP Financial Measures by Business Segment Within the Institutional Securities business segment, these
revenues are primarily composed of fees earned from
$ in billions 2023 2022 2021
Average common equity2 underwriting equity and fixed income securities, syndicating
Institutional Securities $ 45.6 $ 48.8 $ 43.5 loans and advisory services in relation to mergers and
Wealth Management 28.8 31.0 28.6 acquisitions, divestitures and corporate restructurings.
Investment Management 10.4 10.6 8.8
ROE3 Within the Wealth Management business segment, these
Institutional Securities 7 % 10 % 20 % revenues are derived from the distribution of newly issued
Wealth Management 17 % 16 % 16 % securities.
Investment Management 6 % 6 % 15 %
Average tangible common equity2 Trading
Institutional Securities $ 45.2 $ 48.3 $ 42.9
Wealth Management 14.8 16.3 13.4
Trading revenues include the realized gains and losses from
Investment Management 0.7 0.8 0.9
transactions in financial instruments, unrealized gains and
ROTCE3
losses from ongoing changes in the fair value of our positions,
Institutional Securities 7 % 10 % 20 %
and gains and losses from financial instruments used to
Wealth Management 33 % 31 % 34 %
Investment Management 88 % 86 % 144 % economically hedge compensation expense related to DCP.
1. Net revenues and compensation expense are adjusted for DCP for both Firm and
Within the Institutional Securities business segment, Trading
Wealth Management business segment. See “Other Matters” herein for more
information. revenues arise from transactions in cash instruments and
2. Average common equity and average tangible common equity for each business
derivatives in which we act as a market maker for our clients.
segment is determined using our Required Capital framework (see “Liquidity and
Capital Resources—Regulatory Requirements—Attribution of Average Common In this role, we stand ready to buy, sell or otherwise transact
Equity According to the Required Capital Framework” herein). The sums of the
with customers under a variety of market conditions and to
segments’ Average common equity and Average tangible common equity do not
equal the Consolidated measures due to Parent Company equity. provide firm or indicative prices in response to customer
3. The calculation of ROE and ROTCE by segment uses net income applicable to
requests. Our liquidity obligations can be explicit in some
Morgan Stanley by segment less preferred dividends allocated to each segment as
a percentage of average common equity and average tangible common equity, cases, and in others, customers expect us to be willing to
respectively, allocated to each segment.
transact with them. In order to most effectively fulfill our
Return on Tangible Common Equity Goal market-making function, we engage in activities across all of
We have an ROTCE goal of 20%. Our ROTCE goal is a our trading businesses that include, but are not limited to:
forward-looking statement that is based on a normal market
environment and may be materially affected by many factors. • taking positions in anticipation of, and in response to,
customer demand to buy or sell and—depending on the
See “Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements” herein liquidity of the relevant market and the size of the position
for further information on market and economic conditions —to hold those positions for a period of time;
and their potential effects on our future operating results. • building, maintaining and rebalancing inventory held to
facilitate client activity through trades with other market
ROTCE represents a non-GAAP financial measure. For participants;
further information on non-GAAP measures, see “Selected • managing and assuming basis risk (risk associated with
Non-GAAP Financial Information” herein. imperfect hedging) between risks incurred from the
facilitation of client transactions and the standardized
Business Segments
products available in the market to hedge those risks;
• trading in the market to remain current on pricing and
Substantially all of our operating revenues and operating
trends; and
expenses are directly attributable to our business segments.
• engaging in other activities to provide efficiency and
Certain revenues and expenses have been allocated to each
liquidity for markets.
business segment, generally in proportion to its respective net
revenues, non-interest expenses or other relevant measures. In many markets, the realized and unrealized gains and losses
See Note 22 to the financial statements for segment net from purchase and sale transactions will include any spreads
revenues by income statement line item and information on between bids and offers. Certain fees received on loans
intersegment transactions. carried at fair value and dividends from equity securities are
also recorded in Trading revenues since they relate to
Net Revenues
positions carried at fair value.
Investment Banking
Within the Wealth Management business segment, Trading
revenues primarily include revenues from customers’
Investment banking revenues are derived from client
purchases and sales of fixed income instruments in which we
engagements in which we act as an advisor, underwriter or
act as principal, as well as gains and losses related to DCP
distributor of capital.
investments.
33 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Investments Within the Investment Management business segment, Asset
management revenues are primarily composed of fees
Investments revenues are composed of realized and received from investment vehicles on the basis of assets under
unrealized gains and losses derived from investments, management. Performance-based fees, not in the form of
including those associated with employee deferred carried interest, are earned on certain products and separately
compensation and co-investment plans. Estimates of the fair managed accounts as a percentage of appreciation in value
value of the investments that produce these revenues may and, in certain cases, are based upon the achievement of
involve significant judgment and may fluctuate significantly performance criteria. These performance fees are generally
over time in light of business, market, economic and financial recognized on a quarterly or annual basis.
conditions, generally or in relation to specific transactions.
Net Interest
Within the Institutional Securities segment, gains and losses
are primarily from business-related investments. Certain Interest income and Interest expense are functions of the level
investments are subject to sale restrictions. and mix of total assets and liabilities, including Trading assets
and Trading liabilities, Investment securities, Securities
Within the Investment Management business segment, borrowed or purchased under agreements to resell, Securities
Investments revenues are primarily from performance-based loaned or sold under agreements to repurchase, Loans,
fees in the form of carried interest, a portion of which is Deposits and Borrowings.
subject to reversal, and gains and losses from investments.
The business is entitled to receive carried interest when the Within the Institutional Securities business segment, Net
return in certain funds exceeds specified performance targets. interest is a function of market-making strategies, client
Additionally, we consolidate certain sponsored Investment activity, and the prevailing level, term structure and volatility
Management funds where revenues are primarily attributable of interest rates. Net interest is impacted by market-making,
to holders of noncontrolling interests. lending and financing activities as we generally earn interest
on securities held by the Firm, Securities borrowed, Securities
Commissions and Fees purchased under agreements to resell, Loans and margin
loans, while Borrowings, Securities loaned and Securities sold
Commissions and fees result from arrangements in which the
under agreements to repurchase generally incur interest
client is charged a fee for executing transactions related to
expense.
securities, services related to sales and trading activities, and
sales of other products. Within the Wealth Management business segment, Interest
income is driven by assets held including Investment
Within the Institutional Securities business segment,
securities, Loans and margin loans. Interest expense is driven
commissions and fees include fees earned from market-
by Deposits and other funding.
making activities, such as executing and clearing client
transactions on major stock and derivative exchanges, as well Other
as from OTC derivatives.
Other revenues for Institutional Securities include revenues
Within the Wealth Management business segment, and losses from equity method investments, fees earned in
commissions and fees arise from client transactions primarily association with lending activities, mark-to-market gains and
in equity securities, insurance products, mutual funds, losses on loans and lending commitments held for sale, as
alternative investments, futures and options. Wealth well as gains and losses on economic derivative hedges
Management also earns revenues from order flow payments associated with certain held-for-sale and held-for-investment
for directing customer orders to broker-dealers, exchanges loans and lending commitments.
and market centers for execution.
Other revenues for Wealth Management include realized
Asset Management gains and losses on AFS securities, account handling fees,
referral fees and other miscellaneous revenues.
Asset management revenues include fees associated with the
management and supervision of assets and the distribution of Provision for Credit Losses
funds and similar products.
The Provision for credit losses includes the provision for
Within the Wealth Management business segment, Asset credit losses for loans and lending commitments held for
management revenues are related to advisory services investment.
associated with fee-based assets, account service and
administration, as well as distribution of products. These Institutional Securities—Fixed Income and Equities
revenues are generally based on the net asset value of the
account in which a client is invested. Fixed income and Equities net revenues are composed of
Trading revenues, Commissions and fees, Asset management
revenues, Net interest, and certain Investments and Other
December 2023 Form 10-K 34Table of Contents
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
revenues directly attributable to those businesses. These • Commodities products and Other. We make markets in
revenues, which can be affected by a variety of interrelated various commodity products related primarily to electricity,
factors, including market volumes, bid-offer spreads and the natural gas, oil and metals. Other activities primarily
impact of market conditions on inventory held to facilitate include results from the centralized management of our
client activity, as well as the effect of hedging activity, are fixed income derivative counterparty exposures and the
viewed in the aggregate when assessing the performance and management of derivative counterparty risk. These
profitability of our businesses. activities are primarily recorded in Trading revenues.
Following is a description of the revenue-generating activities Fixed income also includes certain Investments and Other
within our equity and fixed income businesses, as well as how revenues.
their results impact the income statement line items.
Institutional Securities—Other Net Revenues
Equity—Financing. We provide financing, prime brokerage
and fund administration services to our clients active in the Other net revenues include impacts from certain treasury
equity markets through a variety of products, including functions, such as liquidity and funding costs and gains and
margin lending, securities lending and swaps. Results from losses on economic hedges related to certain borrowings.
this business are largely driven by the difference between Other net revenues also include mark-to-market gains and
financing income earned and financing and liquidity costs losses on held-for-sale corporate loans and lending
incurred, which are reflected in Net interest for securities commitments, as well as net interest and gain and losses on
lending products, and in Trading revenues for derivative economic hedges associated with held-for-sale and held-for-
products. Fees for providing fund administration services are investment corporate loans and lending commitments. Also
reflected in Asset management revenues. included are gains and losses from financial instruments used
to economically hedge compensation expense related to
Equity—Execution services. A significant portion of the certain DCP, income and losses from the equity method
results for this business is generated by commissions and fees investment related to our Japanese securities joint venture
from executing and clearing client transactions on major stock with MUFG, as well as Investments and Other revenues that
and derivative exchanges, as well as from OTC transactions. are not directly attributable to Fixed income and Equities
We make markets for our clients principally in equity-related businesses.
securities and derivative products, including those that
provide liquidity and are utilized for hedging. Market-making Compensation Expense
also generates gains and losses on inventory held to facilitate
Compensation and benefits expenses include base salaries and
client activity, which are reflected in Trading revenues.
fixed allowances, formulaic programs, discretionary incentive
Execution services also includes certain Investments and
compensation, amortization of deferred cash and equity
Other revenues.
awards, changes in the fair value of DCP investments,
Fixed income—Within fixed income, we make markets in including the Firm’s share price for certain awards, carried
various flow and structured products in order to facilitate interest allocated to employees, severance costs, and other
client activity as part of the following products and services: items such as health and welfare benefits.
• Global macro products. We make markets for our clients in The factors that drive compensation for our employees vary
interest rate, foreign exchange and emerging market from period to period, from segment to segment and within a
products, including exchange-traded and OTC securities segment. For certain revenue-producing employees in the
and derivative instruments. The results of this market- Wealth Management and Investment Management business
making activity are primarily driven by gains and losses segments, compensation is largely paid on the basis of
from buying and selling positions to stand ready for and formulaic payouts that link employee compensation to
satisfy client demand and are recorded in Trading revenues. revenues. Compensation for other employees, including
• Credit products. We make markets in credit-sensitive revenue-producing employees in the Institutional Securities
products, such as corporate bonds and mortgage securities business segment, include base salary and benefits and may
and other securitized products, and related derivative also include incentive compensation that is determined
instruments. The values of positions in this business are following the assessment of the performance of the Firm,
sensitive to changes in credit spreads and interest rates, business unit and individual.
which result in gains and losses reflected in Trading
Compensation expense for DCP is recognized over the
revenues. We undertake lending activities, which include
relevant vesting period and is adjusted based on the fair value
commercial mortgage lending, secured lending facilities
of the referenced investments until distribution. Although
and financing extended to sales and trading customers. Due
changes in compensation expense resulting from changes in
to the amount and type of the interest-bearing securities and
the fair value of the referenced investments will generally be
loans making up this business, a significant portion of the
offset by changes in the fair value of investments made by the
results is also reflected in Net interest revenues.
Firm, there is typically a timing difference between the
35 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
immediate recognition of gains and losses on the Firm's
investments and the compensation expense recognized over
the vesting period.
Income Taxes
The Income tax provision for our business segments is
generally determined based on the revenues, expenses and
activities directly attributable to each business segment.
Certain items have been allocated to each business segment,
generally in proportion to its respective net revenues or other
relevant measures.
December 2023 Form 10-K 36Table of Contents
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Institutional Securities Investment Banking continues to operate in a market
environment characterized by lower completed M&A and
Income Statement Information underwriting activity amid market uncertainty, including the
future path of interest rates.
% Change
$ in millions 2023 2022 2021 2023 2022
See “Investment Banking Volumes” herein.
Revenues
Advisory $ 2,244 $ 2,946 $ 3,487 (24) % (16) %
Equity, Fixed Income and Other Net Revenues
Equity 889 851 4,437 4 % (81) %
Fixed income 1,445 1,438 2,348 — % (39) %
Equity and Fixed Income Net Revenues
Total Underwriting 2,334 2,289 6,785 2 % (66) %
Total Investment banking 4,578 5,235 10,272 (13) % (49) % 2023
Equity 9,986 10,769 11,435 (7) % (6) %
Net All
Fixed income 7,673 9,022 7,516 (15) % 20 % $ in millions Trading Fees1 Interest2 Other3 Total
Other 823 (633) 610 N/M N/M Financing $ 7,206 $ 524 $ (2,886) $ 66 $ 4,910
Net revenues 23,060 24,393 29,833 (5) % (18) % Execution services 2,919 2,235 (190) 112 5,076
Provision for credit losses 401 211 (7) 90 % N/M Total Equity $ 10,125 $ 2,759 $ (3,076) $ 178 $ 9,986
Compensation and benefits 8,369 8,246 9,165 1 % (10) % Total Fixed income $ 7,848 $ 375 $ (975) $ 425 $ 7,673
Non-compensation expenses 9,814 9,221 8,861 6 % 4 %
2022
Total non-interest expenses 18,183 17,467 18,026 4 % (3) %
Net All
In i c n o c m om e e b e ta fo xe re s provision for 4,476 6,715 11,814 (33) % (43) % $ in millions Trading Fees1 Interest2 Other3 Total
Provision for income taxes 884 1,308 2,746 (32) % (52) % Financing $ 5,223 $ 535 $ (257) $ 36 $ 5,537
Net income 3,592 5,407 9,068 (34) % (40) % Execution services 2,947 2,462 (81) (96) 5,232
Net income applicable to Total Equity $ 8,170 $ 2,997 $ (338) $ (60) $ 10,769
noncontrolling interests 139 165 111 (16) % 49 % Total Fixed income $ 7,711 $ 341 $ 922 $ 48 $ 9,022
Net income applicable to
Morgan Stanley $ 3,453 $ 5,242 $ 8,957 (34) % (41) % 2021
Net All
Investment Banking $ in millions Trading Fees1 Interest2 Other3 Total
Financing $ 4,110 $ 508 $ 520 $ 8 $ 5,146
Investment Banking Volumes Execution services 3,327 2,648 (226) 540 6,289
Total Equity $ 7,437 $ 3,156 $ 294 $ 548 $ 11,435
$ in billions 2023 2022 2021 Total Fixed income $ 5,098 $ 307 $ 1,835 $ 276 $ 7,516
Completed mergers and acquisitions1 $ 655 $ 881 $ 1,107
1. Includes Commissions and fees and Asset management revenues.
Equity and equity-related offerings2, 3 31 23 117 2. Includes funding costs, which are allocated to the businesses based on funding
Fixed income offerings2, 4 235 229 371 usage.
3. Includes Investments and Other revenues.
Source: Refinitiv data as of January 2, 2024. Transaction volumes may not be
indicative of net revenues in a given period. In addition, transaction volumes for prior Equity
periods may vary from amounts previously reported due to the subsequent withdrawal,
change in value or change in timing of certain transactions.
1. Includes transactions of $100 million or more. Based on full credit to each of the Net revenues of $9,986 million in 2023 decreased 7%
advisors in a transaction. compared with the prior year, reflecting decreases in
2. Based on full credit for single book managers and equal credit for joint book
managers. Financing and Execution services.
3. Includes Rule 144A issuances and registered public offerings of common stock,
convertible securities and rights offerings.
• Financing revenues decreased primarily due to higher
4. Includes Rule 144A and publicly registered issuances, non-convertible preferred
stock, mortgage-backed and asset-backed securities, and taxable municipal debt. funding and liquidity costs compared with the prior year.
Excludes leveraged loans and self-led issuances.
• Execution services revenues decreased primarily due to
Investment Banking Revenues lower gains on inventory held to facilitate client activity in
derivatives and cash equities and lower client activity in
Net revenues of $4,578 million in 2023 decreased 13% cash equities, partially offset by mark-to-market gains on
compared with the prior year, primarily reflecting lower business-related investments compared with losses in the
Advisory revenues. prior year.
• Advisory revenues decreased primarily due to fewer Fixed Income
completed M&A transactions on lower market volumes.
• Equity underwriting revenues increased on higher volumes, Net revenues of $7,673 million in 2023 decreased 15%
primarily in secondary offerings and convertible issuances, compared with the prior year, primarily reflecting a decrease
partially offset by lower revenues from initial public in foreign exchange and commodities products.
offerings.
• Fixed income underwriting revenues were relatively • Global macro products revenues decreased primarily due to
unchanged from the prior year, primarily reflecting higher a decline in foreign exchange products.
investment-grade loan and bond issuances, offset by lower • Credit products revenues decreased primarily due to lower
non-investment grade loan issuances. client activity across products.
37 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
• Commodities products and other fixed income revenues
decreased compared to elevated results in the prior year,
primarily due to lower gains on inventory held to facilitate
client activity and lower client activity.
Other Net Revenues
Other net revenues were $823 million in 2023 compared with
losses of $633 million in the prior year, primarily due to
lower mark-to-market losses on corporate loans held for sale,
inclusive of hedges, and higher net interest income and fees
on corporate loans, mark-to-market gains compared with
losses in the prior year on DCP investments and impacts from
liquidity and funding costs.
Provision for Credit Losses
In 2023, the Provision for credit losses on loans and lending
commitments of $401 million was primarily related to
deteriorating conditions in the commercial real estate sector,
including provisions for certain specific loans, mainly in the
office portfolio, and modest growth in certain other loan
portfolios. The Provision for credit losses on loans and
lending commitments of $211 million in 2022 was primarily
driven by portfolio growth and deterioration in the
macroeconomic outlook.
For further information on the Provision for credit losses, see
“Credit Risk” herein.
Non-Interest Expenses
Non-interest expenses of $18,183 million in 2023 increased
4% compared with the prior year due to higher Non-
compensation expenses and Compensation and benefits
expenses.
• Compensation and benefits expenses increased primarily
due to higher expenses related to DCP and higher stock-
based compensation expenses driven by the Firm’s share
price movement in the prior year, partially offset by lower
expenses related to outstanding deferred equity
compensation.
• Non-compensation expenses increased primarily due to
increased spend on technology, an FDIC special assessment
of $121 million, higher legal expenses, including $249
million related to a specific matter, higher execution-related
and marketing and business development expenses.
December 2023 Form 10-K 38Table of Contents
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Wealth Management recent periods. Should these factors continue, the growth rate
of our NNA may be impacted.
Income Statement Information
% Change Advisor-Led Channel
$ in millions 2023 2022 2021 2023 2022 At December 31, At December 31,
Revenues $ in billions 2023 2022
Asset management $ 14,019 $ 13,872 $ 13,966 1 % (1) % Advisor-led client assets1 $ 3,979 $ 3,392
Transactional1 3,556 2,473 4,259 44 % (42) % Fee-based client assets2 $ 1,983 $ 1,678
Net interest 8,118 7,429 5,393 9 % 38 % Fee-based client assets as a
Other1 575 643 625 (11) % 3 % p a e ss rc e e ts ntage of advisor-led client 50 % 49 %
Net revenues 26,268 24,417 24,243 8 % 1 %
2023 2022 2021
Provision for credit losses 131 69 11 90 % N/M
Fee-based asset flows3 $ 109.2 $ 162.8 $ 179.3
Compensation and benefits 13,972 12,534 13,090 11 % (4) %
Non-compensation expenses 5,635 5,231 4,961 8 % 5 % 1. Advisor-led client assets represent client assets in accounts that have a Wealth
Management representative assigned.
Total non-interest expenses 19,607 17,765 18,051 10 % (2) % 2. Fee-based client assets represent the amount of assets in client accounts where
Income before provision for the basis of payment for services is a fee calculated on those assets.
income taxes 6,530 6,583 6,181 (1) % 7 % 3. Fee-based asset flows include net new fee-based assets (including asset
Provision for income taxes 1,508 1,444 1,447 4 % — % acquisitions), net account transfers, dividends, interest and client fees, and exclude
institutional cash management related activity. For a description of the Inflows and
Net income applicable to Outflows included in Fee-based asset flows, see Fee-based client assets herein.
Morgan Stanley $ 5,022 $ 5,139 $ 4,734 (2) % 9 %
1. Transactional includes Investment banking, Trading, and Commissions and fees Self-Directed Channel
revenues. Other includes Investments and Other revenues.
At December 31, At December 31,
2023 2022
Wealth Management Metrics
Self-directed assets (in billions)1 $ 1,150 $ 795
At December 31, At December 31, Self-directed households (in millions)2 8.1 8.0
$ in billions 2023 2022
Total client assets1 $ 5,129 $ 4,187 2023 2022 2021
U.S. Bank Subsidiary loans $ 147 $ 146 Daily average revenue trades (“DARTs”)
Margin and other lending2 $ 21 $ 22 (in thousands)3 759 864 1,161
Deposits3 $ 346 $ 351 1. Self-directed client assets represent active accounts which are not advisor led.
Active accounts are defined as having at least $25 in assets.
Annualized weighted average cost of 2. Self-directed households represent the total number of households that include at
deposits4
least one active account with self-directed assets. Individual households or
Period end 2.92 % 1.59 % participants that are engaged in one or more of our Wealth Management channels
are included in each of the respective channel counts.
Period average 2.43 % 0.53 %
3. DARTs represent the total self-directed trades in a period divided by the number of
trading days during that period.
2023 2022 2021
Net new assets $ 282.3 $ 311.3 $ 437.7 Workplace Channel1
1. Client assets represent those for which Wealth Management is providing services
At December 31, At December 31,
including financial advisor-led brokerage, custody, administrative and investment
2023 2022
advisory services; self-directed brokerage and investment advisory services;
financial and wealth planning services; workplace services, including stock plan Workplace unvested assets (in
administration, and retirement plan services. See “Advisor-Led Channel” and “Self- billions)2 $ 416 $ 302
Directed Channel” herein for additional information. Number of participants (in millions)3 6.6 6.3
2. Margin and other lending represents margin lending arrangements, which allow
customers to borrow against the value of qualifying securities and other lending 1. The workplace channel includes equity compensation solutions for companies, their
which includes non-purpose securities-based lending on non-bank entities. executives and employees.
3. Deposits reflect liabilities sourced from Wealth Management clients and other 2. Stock plan unvested assets represent the market value of public company
sources of funding on our U.S. Bank Subsidiaries. Deposits include sweep deposit securities at the end of the period. The stock plan vested asset retention rate within
programs, savings and other, and time deposits. As of December 31, 2023, there the workplace channel, which represents the percentage of stock plan assets
were no off-balance sheet amounts excluded from deposits. As of December 31, retained in either the self-directed or advisor-led channels following vesting, is 29%,
2022, approximately $6 billion off-balance sheet amounts were excluded from 34% and 24% for 2023, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The rate is derived using the
deposits. stock plan inflows for the previous year, less related outflows for the previous year
4. Annualized weighted average represents the total annualized weighted average and reported year, and dividing the result by the previous year inflows.
cost of the various deposit products, excluding the effect of related hedging 3. Stock plan participants represent total accounts with vested and/or unvested stock
derivatives. The period end cost of deposits is based upon balances and rates as of plan assets in the workplace channel. Individuals with accounts in multiple plans
December 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022. The period average is based on daily are counted as participants in each plan.
balances and rates for the year.
Net Revenues
Net New Assets (NNA)
Asset Management
NNA represent client asset inflows, inclusive of interest,
dividends and asset acquisitions, less client asset outflows, Asset management revenues of $14,019 million in 2023
and exclude the impact of business combinations/divestitures increased 1% compared with the prior year, reflecting the
and the impact of fees and commissions. The level of NNA in cumulative impact of positive fee-based flows, partially offset
a given period is influenced by a variety of factors, including by a reduction driven by changes in client and product mix
macroeconomic factors that impact client investment and and lower average fee-based client asset levels due to declines
spending behaviors, our ability to attract and retain financial in the markets.
advisors and clients, and timing of large idiosyncratic flows.
Macroeconomic factors have had an impact on our NNA in See “Fee-Based Client Assets Rollforwards” herein.
39 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Transactional Revenues Fee-Based Client Assets Rollforwards
At At
Transactional revenues of $3,556 million in 2023 increased December 31, Market December 31,
44% compared with the prior year, primarily due to $282 $ in billions 2022 Inflows1 Outflows2 Impact3 2023
Separately
million of gains on DCP investments compared with $858 managed4 $ 501 $ 70 $ (23) $ 41 $ 589
million of losses in the prior year, partially offset by lower Unified managed 408 96 (56) 53 501
client activity. Advisor 167 29 (32) 24 188
Portfolio manager 552 98 (73) 68 645
For further information on the impact of DCP, see “Selected Subtotal $ 1,628 $ 293 $ (184) $ 186 $ 1,923
Non-GAAP Financial Information” herein. Cash management 50 60 (50) — 60
Total fee-based
client assets $ 1,678 $ 353 $ (234) $ 186 $ 1,983
Net Interest
At At
Net interest revenues of $8,118 million in 2023 increased 9% December 31, Market December 31,
$ in billions 2021 Inflows1,5 Outflows2 Impact3 2022
compared with the prior year, primarily due to the net effect
Separately
of higher interest rates, partially offset by changes in deposit managed4 $ 479 $ 141 $ (25) $ (94) $ 501
mix. Unified managed 467 76 (50) (85) 408
Advisor 211 29 (35) (38) 167
The level and pace of interest rate changes and other Portfolio manager 636 94 (67) (111) 552
macroeconomic factors continued to impact client preferences Subtotal $ 1,793 $ 340 $ (177) $ (328) $ 1,628
for cash allocation to higher-yielding products and the pace of Cash management 46 38 (34) — 50
reallocation of client balances, resulting in changes in the Total fee-based
client assets $ 1,839 $ 378 $ (211) $ (328) $ 1,678
deposit mix and associated interest expense, as well as client
demand for loans. If these trends persist, net interest income At At
December 31, Market December 31,
could be impacted in future periods. $ in billions 2020 Inflows1,6 Outflows2 Impact3 2021
Separately
managed4 $ 359 $ 86 $ (20) $ 54 $ 479
Provision for Credit Losses
Unified managed 379 100 (54) 42 467
The Provision for credit losses on loans and lending Advisor 177 42 (30) 22 211
Portfolio manager 509 113 (58) 72 636
commitments of $131 million in 2023 was primarily related to
Subtotal $ 1,424 $ 341 $ (162) $ 190 $ 1,793
deteriorating conditions in the commercial real estate sector,
Cash management 48 30 (32) — 46
including provisions for certain specific loans, mainly in the
Total fee-based
office portfolio. The Provision for credit losses on loans and client assets $ 1,472 $ 371 $ (194) $ 190 $ 1,839
lending commitments was $69 million in 2022, primarily 1. Inflows include new accounts, account transfers, deposits, dividends and interest.
2. Outflows include closed or terminated accounts, account transfers, withdrawals and
driven by portfolio growth in Residential real estate loans and
client fees.
deteriorating conditions in the commercial real estate sector. 3. Market impact includes realized and unrealized gains and losses on portfolio
investments.
4. Includes non-custody account values based on asset values reported on a quarter
For further information on the Provision for credit losses, see lag by third-party custodians.
“Credit Risk” herein. 5. Includes $75 billion of fee-based assets acquired in an asset acquisition in the first
quarter of 2022, reflected in Separately managed.
6. Includes $43 billion of fee-based assets acquired in an asset acquisition in the third
Non-Interest Expenses quarter of 2021, reflected in Separately managed.
Average Fee Rates1
Non-interest expenses of $19,607 million in 2023 increased
10% compared with the prior year, as a result of higher Fee rate in bps 2023 2022 2021
Compensation and benefits expense and higher Non- Separately managed 12 12 14
compensation expense. Unified managed 92 94 95
Advisor 80 81 82
• Compensation and benefits expenses increased, primarily Portfolio manager 91 92 93
due to higher expenses related to DCP and higher salaries Subtotal 65 66 72
driven by hiring mix. Cash management 6 6 5
Total fee-based client assets 64 65 70
For further information on the impact of expenses related to
1. Based on Asset management revenues related to advisory services associated with
DCP, see “Selected Non-GAAP Financial Information” fee-based assets.
herein.
Asset management revenues within the Wealth Management
• Non-compensation expenses increased, primarily driven by segment are primarily generated from the following types of
an FDIC special assessment of $165 million, increased accounts:
spend on technology and costs related to exits of real estate.
• Separately managed—accounts by which third party and
affiliated asset managers are engaged to manage clients’
assets with investment decisions made by the asset
December 2023 Form 10-K 40Table of Contents
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
manager. Only one third-party asset manager strategy can
be held per account.
• Unified managed—accounts that provide the client with the
ability to combine separately managed accounts, mutual
funds and exchange-traded funds, all in one aggregate
account. Investment decisions and discretionary authority
may be exercised by the client, financial advisor or
portfolio manager. Also includes accounts that give the
client the ability to systematically allocate assets across a
wide range of mutual funds, for which the investment
decisions are made by the client.
• Advisor—accounts where the investment decisions must be
approved by the client, and the financial advisor must
obtain approval each time a change is made to the account
or its investments.
• Portfolio manager—accounts where a financial advisor has
discretion (contractually approved by the client) to make
ongoing investment decisions without the client’s approval
for each individual change.
• Cash management—accounts where the financial advisor
provides discretionary cash management services to
institutional clients, whereby securities or proceeds are
invested and reinvested in accordance with the client’s
investment criteria. Generally, the portfolio will be invested
in short-term fixed income and cash equivalent
investments.
41 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Investment Management Net Revenues
Income Statement Information Asset Management and Related Fees
% Change Asset management and related fees of $5,231 million in 2023
$ in millions 2023 2022 2021 2023 2022 decreased 2% compared with the prior year, primarily due to
Revenues a shift in the mix of average AUM, driven by the cumulative
Asset management and related effect of net flows.
fees $ 5,231 $ 5,332 $ 5,576 (2) % (4) %
Performance-based income and
Asset management revenues are influenced by the level,
other1 139 43 644 N/M (93) %
Net revenues 5,370 5,375 6,220 — % (14) % relative mix of AUM and related fee rates. The market
Compensation and benefits 2,217 2,273 2,373 (2) % (4) % environment and client preferences in recent quarters have
Non-compensation expenses 2,311 2,295 2,169 1 % 6 % impacted the mix of our average Long-Term AUM level
Total non-interest expenses 4,528 4,568 4,542 (1) % 1 % across certain asset classes. To the extent these conditions
Income before provision for continue, we would expect our Asset management revenue to
income taxes 842 807 1,678 4 % (52) %
continue to be negatively impacted.
Provision for income taxes 199 162 356 23 % (54) %
Net income 643 645 1,322 — % (51) %
See “Assets Under Management or Supervision” herein.
Net income applicable to
noncontrolling interests 4 (15) (25) 127 % 40 %
Net income applicable to Performance-based Income and Other
Morgan Stanley $ 639 $ 660 $ 1,347 (3) % (51) %
Performance-based income and other revenues increased to
1. Includes Investments, Trading, Commissions and fees, Net interest and Other
revenues. $139 million in 2023, from $43 million in the prior year,
primarily due to mark-to-market gains in 2023 compared with
losses in the prior year on DCP investments and investments
in public funds, partially offset by lower accrued carried
interest in certain private funds.
Non-Interest Expenses
Non-interest expenses of $4,528 million in 2023 decreased
1% from the prior year, primarily due to lower Compensation
and benefits expenses.
• Compensation and benefits expenses decreased primarily
due to lower expenses related to compensation associated
with carried interest, partially offset by higher expenses
related to DCP.
• Non-compensation expenses were relatively unchanged for
the current year.
December 2023 Form 10-K 42Table of Contents
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Assets Under Management or Supervision Average AUM
Rollforwards $ in billions 2023 2022 2021
Equity $ 279 $ 298 $ 362
At At
Dec 31, Market Dec 31, Fixed income 170 186 181
$ in billions 2022 Inflows1 Outflows2 Impact3 Other4,5 2023 Alternatives and Solutions 466 435 380
Equity $ 259 $ 40 $ (57) $ 57 $ (4) $ 295 Long-Term AUM Subtotal 915 919 923
Fixed Income 173 56 (62) 11 (7) 171 Liquidity and Overlay Services 464 462 430
Alternatives
and Solutions 431 108 (91) 57 3 508 Total AUM $ 1,379 $ 1,381 $ 1,353
Long-Term
AUM $ 863 $ 204 $ (210) $ 125 $ (8) $ 974 Average Fee Rates1
Liquidity and
Overlay
Services 442 2,282 (2,244) 20 (15) 485 Fee rate in bps 2023 2022 2021
Total $ 1,305 $ 2,486 $ (2,454) $ 145 $ (23) $ 1,459 Equity 71 70 74
Fixed income 35 35 38
At At
Dec 31, Market Dec 31, Alternatives and Solutions 32 34 36
$ in billions 2021 Inflows1 Outflows2 Impact3 Other4 2022 Long-Term AUM 44 46 51
Equity $ 395 $ 56 $ (74) $ (106) $ (12) $ 259
Liquidity and Overlay Services 13 11 5
Fixed Income 207 66 (78) (16) (6) 173
Total AUM 34 34 37
Alternatives
and Solutions 466 102 (83) (47) (7) 431 1. Based on Asset management revenues, net of waivers, excluding performance-
Long-Term based fees and other non-management fees. For certain non-U.S. funds, it includes
AUM $ 1,068 $ 224 $ (235) $ (169) $ (25) $ 863 the portion of advisory fees that the advisor collects on behalf of third-party
Liquidity and distributors. The payment of those fees to the distributor is included in Non-
Overlay compensation expenses in the income statement.
Services 497 2,224 (2,268) (6) (5) 442
Total $ 1,565 $ 2,448 $ (2,503) $ (175) $ (30) $ 1,305 Asset management and other related fees within the
Investment Management segment are primarily generated
At At
Dec 31, Market Dec 31, from Equity, Fixed Income and the following products:
$ in billions 2020 Inflows1 Outflows2 Impact3 Other4,6 2021
Equity $ 242 $ 100 $ (85) $ 34 $ 104 $ 395
Alternatives and Solutions. Includes products in fund of
Fixed Income 98 67 (55) — 97 207
funds, real estate, infrastructure, private equity and credit
Alternatives
and Solutions 153 95 (78) 51 245 466 strategies and multi-asset portfolios, as well as systematic
Long-Term strategies that create custom investment solutions.
AUM $ 493 $ 262 $ (218) $ 85 $ 446 $ 1,068
Liquidity and
Overlay Liquidity and Overlay Services. Includes liquidity fund
Services 288 1,940 (1,852) 6 115 497
products, as well as overlay services, which represent
Total $ 781 $ 2,202 $ (2,070) $ 91 $ 561 $ 1,565
investment strategies that use passive exposure instruments to
1. Inflows represent investments or commitments from new and existing clients in new
or existing investment products, including reinvestments of client dividends and obtain, offset or substitute specific portfolio exposures,
increases in invested capital. Inflows exclude the impact of exchanges, whereby a
beyond those provided by the underlying holdings of the
client changes positions within the same asset class.
2. Outflows represent redemptions from clients’ funds, transition of funds from the fund.
committed capital period to the invested capital period and decreases in invested
capital. Outflows exclude the impact of exchanges, whereby a client changes
positions within the same asset class.
3. Market impact includes realized and unrealized gains and losses on portfolio
investments. This excludes any funds where market impact does not impact
management fees.
4. Other contains both distributions and foreign currency impact for all periods.
Distributions represent decreases in invested capital due to returns of capital after
the investment period of a fund. It also includes fund dividends that the client has
not reinvested. Foreign currency impact reflects foreign currency changes for non-
U.S. dollar dominated funds.
5. In 2023, our Retail Municipal and Corporate Fixed Income business (“FIMS”) was
combined with our Parametric retail customized solutions business. The impact of
the change was a $6 billion movement in AUM from Fixed Income to the
Alternatives and Solutions asset class included in Other.
6. The 2021 Other amounts primarily include AUM additions related to the Eaton
Vance Corp. (“Eaton Vance”) acquisition.
43 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Supplemental Financial Information Other Matters
U.S. Bank Subsidiaries Deferred Cash-Based Compensation
Our U.S. Bank Subsidiaries accept deposits, provide loans to The Firm sponsors a number of deferred cash-based
a variety of customers, including large corporate and compensation programs for current and former employees,
institutional clients, as well as high to ultra-high net worth which generally contain vesting, clawback and cancellation
individuals, and invest in securities. Lending activity in our provisions.
U.S. Bank Subsidiaries from the Institutional Securities
business segment primarily includes Secured lending Employees are permitted to allocate the value of their
facilities, Commercial and Residential real estate and deferred awards among a menu of notional investments,
Corporate loans. Lending activity in our U.S. Bank whereby the value of their awards will track the performance
Subsidiaries from the Wealth Management business segment of the referenced notional investments. The menu of
primarily includes Securities-based lending, which allows investments, which is selected by the Firm, includes fixed
clients to borrow money against the value of qualifying income, equity, commodity and money market funds.
securities, and Residential real estate loans.
Compensation expense for DCP awards is calculated based on
For a further discussion of our credit risks, see “Quantitative the notional value of the award granted, adjusted for changes
and Qualitative Disclosures about Risk—Credit Risk” herein. in the fair value of the referenced investments that employees
For a further discussion about loans and lending select. Compensation expense is recognized over the vesting
commitments, see Notes 9 and 14 to the financial statements. period relevant to each separately vesting portion of deferred
awards.
U.S. Bank Subsidiaries’ Supplemental Financial Information1
We invest directly, as principal, in financial instruments and
At At
December 31, December 31, other investments to economically hedge certain of our
$ in billions 2023 2022 obligations under these DCP awards. Changes in the fair
Investment securities:
value of such investments, net of financing costs, are recorded
Available-for-sale at fair value $ 66.6 $ 66.9
in net revenues, and included in Transactional revenues in the
Held-to-maturity 51.4 56.4
Wealth Management business segment. Although changes in
Total Investment securities $ 118.0 $ 123.3
compensation expense resulting from changes in the fair value
Wealth Management Loans2
of the referenced investments will generally be offset by
Residential real estate $ 60.3 $ 54.4
Securities-based lending and Other3 86.2 91.7 changes in the fair value of investments recognized in net
Total, net of ACL $ 146.5 $ 146.1 revenues, there is typically a timing difference between the
Institutional Securities Loans2 immediate recognition of gains and losses on our investments
Corporate $ 10.1 $ 6.9 and the deferred recognition of the related compensation
Secured lending facilities 40.8 37.1 expense over the vesting period. While this timing difference
Commercial and Residential real estate 10.7 10.2 may not be material to our Income before provision for
Securities-based lending and Other 4.1 6.0 income taxes in any individual period, it may impact the
Total, net of ACL $ 65.7 $ 60.2 Wealth Management business segment reported ratios and
Total Assets $ 396.1 $ 391.0 operating metrics in certain periods due to potentially
Deposits4 $ 346.1 $ 350.6
significant impacts to net revenues and compensation
1. Amounts exclude transactions between the bank subsidiaries, as well as deposits expenses. At December 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022,
from the Parent Company and affiliates.
2. For a further discussion of loans in the Wealth Management and Institutional substantially all employee referenced investments that
Securities business segments, see “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about
subjected the Firm to price risk were economically hedged.
Risk—Credit Risk” herein.
3. Other loans primarily include tailored lending. For a further discussion of Other
loans, see “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Risk—Credit Risk” Amounts Recognized in Compensation Expense
herein.
4. For further information on deposits, see “Liquidity and Capital Resources—Funding
Management—Balance Sheet—Unsecured Financing” herein. $ in millions 2023 2022 2021
Deferred cash-based awards $ 693 $ 761 $ 810
Return on referenced investments 668 (716) 526
Total recognized in compensation
expense $ 1,361 $ 45 $ 1,336
Amounts Recognized in Compensation Expense by Segment
$ in millions 2023 2022 2021
Institutional Securities $ 162 $ (97) $ 372
Wealth Management 984 11 798
Investment Management 215 131 166
Total recognized in compensation
expense $ 1,361 $ 45 $ 1,336
December 2023 Form 10-K 44Table of Contents
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Projected Future Compensation Obligation1 Accounting Development Updates
$ in millions
Award liabilities at December 31, 20232, 3 $ 5,331 The Financial Accounting Standards Board has issued certain
Fully vested amounts to be distributed by the end of accounting updates that apply to us. Accounting updates not
February 20244 (905) listed below were assessed and determined to be either not
Unrecognized portion of prior awards at December 31,
applicable or to not have a material impact on our financial
20233 1,373
2023 performance year awards granted in 20243 357 condition or results of operations upon adoption.
Total5 $ 6,156
We adopted the following accounting update on January 1,
1. Amounts relate to performance years 2023 and prior.
2024, with no material impact on our financial condition or
2. Balance is reflected in Other liabilities and accrued expenses in the balance sheet
as of December 31, 2023. results of operations upon adoption:
3. Amounts do not include assumptions regarding forfeitures or assumptions about
future market conditions with respect to referenced investments.
4. Distributions after February of each year are generally immaterial. • Investments—Tax Credit Structures. This accounting
5. Of the total projected future compensation obligation, approximately 20% relates to
update permits an election to account for tax equity
Institutional Securities, approximately 70% relates to Wealth Management and
approximately 10% relates to Investment Management. investments using the proportional amortization method if
certain conditions are met. Under the proportional
The previous table presents a rollforward of the Firm’s
amortization method, the initial cost of the investment is
estimated projected future compensation obligation for
amortized in proportion to the income tax credits and other
existing deferred cash-based compensation awards, exclusive income tax benefits received and recognized net in the
of any assumptions about future market conditions with income statement as a component of provision for income
respect to referenced investments. taxes. The update requires a separate accounting policy
election to be made for each tax credit program. Additional
Projected Future Compensation Expense1 disclosures are required regarding (i) the nature of our tax
equity investments and (ii) the effect of our tax equity
$ in millions
investments and related income tax credits on the financial
Estimated to be recognized in:
condition and results of operations.
2024 $ 534
2025 337
We are currently evaluating the following accounting updates;
Thereafter 859
Total $ 1,730 however, we do not expect a material impact on our financial
condition or results of operations upon adoption:
1. Amounts relate to performance years 2023 and prior, and do not include
assumptions regarding forfeitures or assumptions about future market conditions
with respect to referenced investments. • Income Tax Disclosures. This accounting update requires
disclosure of additional information in relation to income
The previous table sets forth an estimate of compensation
taxes, including additional disaggregation of the income tax
expense associated with the projected future compensation
rate reconciliation and income taxes paid. For the income
obligation. Our projected future compensation obligation and
tax rate reconciliation, this update requires (1) disclosure of
expense for DCP for performance years 2023 and prior are
specific categories of reconciling items; and (2) providing
forward-looking statements subject to uncertainty. Actual additional information for reconciling items that meet a
results may be materially affected by various factors, quantitative threshold (if the effect of those reconciling
including, among other things: the performance of each items is equal to or greater than 5 percent of the amount
participant’s referenced investments; changes in market computed by multiplying pretax income (or loss) by the
conditions; participants’ allocation of their deferred awards; applicable statutory income tax rate). For income taxes
and participant cancellations or accelerations. See “Forward- paid, this update requires disclosure of information,
Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” for additional including (1) the amount of income taxes paid (net of
information. refunds received) disaggregated by federal, state, and
foreign taxes; and (2) the amount of income taxes paid (net
For further information on the Firm’s deferred stock-based of refunds received), disaggregated by individual
jurisdictions in which income taxes paid (net of refunds
plans and carried interest compensation, which are excluded
received) is equal to or greater than 5 percent of total
from the previous tables, see Notes 2 and 19 to the financial
income taxes paid (net of refunds received). Additionally,
statements.
the update requires disclosure of (1) income (or loss) before
income taxes, disaggregated between domestic and foreign;
and (2) income taxes disaggregated by federal, state and
foreign. The accounting update is effective for annual
periods beginning January 1, 2025, with early adoption
permitted.
• Segment Reporting. This accounting update requires
additional reportable segment disclosures on an annual and
interim basis, primarily about significant segment expenses
and other segment items that are regularly provided to the
45 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
chief operating decision maker and included within the hierarchy. Level 3 financial assets represented 1.2% and 1.4%
reported measure of segment profit or loss. This update of our total assets, as of December 31, 2023 and December
does not change how operating segments are identified or 31, 2022, respectively.
aggregated, or how quantitative thresholds are applied to
determine the reportable segments. The accounting update In periods of market disruption, the observability of prices
is effective for fiscal years beginning January 1, 2024, and and inputs, as well as market liquidity, may be reduced for
interim periods within fiscal years beginning January 1, many instruments, which could cause an instrument to be
2025, with early adoption permitted.
recategorized from Level 1 to Level 2 or from Level 2 to
Level 3. In addition, a downturn in market conditions could
Critical Accounting Estimates
lead to declines in the valuation of many instruments carried
at fair value. Imprecision in estimating unobservable market
Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S.
inputs or other factors can affect the amount of gain or loss
GAAP, which requires us to make estimates and assumptions
recorded for a particular position. The Firm uses various
(see Note 1 to the financial statements). We believe that of
methodologies and assumptions in the determination of fair
our significant accounting policies (see Note 2 to the financial
value. The use of methodologies or assumptions different than
statements), the following policies involve a higher degree of
those used by the Firm could result in a different estimate of
judgment and complexity.
fair value at the reporting date. For further information on the
definition of fair value, Level 1, Level 2, Level 3 and related
Fair Value
valuation techniques, and quantitative information about and
sensitivity of significant unobservable inputs used in Level 3
Financial Instruments Measured at Fair Value
fair value measurements, see Notes 2 and 4 to the financial
A significant number of our financial instruments are carried statements.
at fair value. The use of fair value to measure financial
Where appropriate, valuation adjustments are made to account
instruments is fundamental to our risk management practices
for various factors, such as liquidity risk (bid-ask
and is our most critical accounting estimate. We make
adjustments), credit quality, model uncertainty, concentration
estimates regarding the valuation of assets and liabilities
risk and funding, in order to arrive at fair value. For a further
measured at fair value in preparing the financial statements.
discussion of valuation adjustments that we apply, see Note 2
These assets and liabilities include, but are not limited to:
to the financial statements.
• Trading assets and Trading liabilities;
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
• Investment Securities—AFS;
• Certain Securities purchased under agreements to resell;
Goodwill
• Loans held-for-sale (measured at the lower of amortized
cost or fair value);
We test goodwill for impairment on an annual basis as of
• Certain Deposits, primarily certificates of deposit;
July 1 and on an interim basis when certain events or
• Certain Securities sold under agreements to repurchase;
circumstances exist. Evaluating goodwill for impairment
• Certain Other secured financings; and
requires management to make significant judgments,
• Certain Borrowings.
including, in part, the use of unobservable inputs that are
subject to uncertainty. Goodwill impairment tests are
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell
performed at the reporting unit level, which is generally at the
an asset or paid to transfer a liability (i.e., the exit price) in an
level of or one level below our business segments. Goodwill
orderly transaction between market participants at the
no longer retains its association with a particular acquisition
measurement date.
once it has been assigned to a reporting unit. As such, all the
activities of a reporting unit, whether acquired or organically
In determining fair value, we use various valuation
developed, are available to support the value of the goodwill.
approaches. A hierarchy for inputs is used in measuring fair
value that maximizes the use of observable prices and inputs,
For both the annual and interim tests, we have the option to
and minimizes the use of unobservable prices and inputs by
either (i) perform a quantitative impairment test or (ii) first
requiring that the relevant observable inputs be used when
perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is
available. The hierarchy is broken down into three levels:
more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is
wherein Level 1 represents quoted prices in active markets,
less than its carrying amount, in which case, the quantitative
Level 2 represents valuations based on quoted prices in
test would be performed.
markets that are not active or for which all significant inputs
are observable, and Level 3 consists of valuation techniques
When performing a quantitative impairment test, we compare
that incorporate significant unobservable inputs and,
the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount,
therefore, require the greatest use of judgment. The fair values
including goodwill. If the fair value of the reporting unit is
for the substantial majority of our financial assets and
less than its carrying amount, the goodwill impairment loss is
liabilities carried at fair value are based on observable prices
equal to the excess of the carrying value over the fair value,
and inputs and are classified in level 1 or 2, of the fair value
December 2023 Form 10-K 46Table of Contents
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
limited by the carrying amount of goodwill allocated to that The initial valuation of an intangible asset as part of the
reporting unit. acquisition method of accounting and the subsequent
valuation of intangible assets as part of an impairment
The carrying value of each reporting unit is determined based assessment are subjective and based, in part, on inputs that are
on the capital allocated to the reporting unit. The estimated unobservable and can be subject to uncertainty. These inputs
fair value of the reporting units is derived based on valuation include, but are not limited to, forecasted cash flows, revenue
techniques we believe market participants would use for each growth rates, customer attrition rates and discount rates.
of the reporting units. The estimated fair value is generally
determined by utilizing a discounted cash flow methodology. For both goodwill and intangible assets, to the extent an
In certain instances, we may also utilize methodologies that impairment loss is recognized, the loss establishes the new
incorporate price-to-book and price-to-earnings multiples of cost basis of the asset. Subsequent reversal of impairment
comparable companies. losses is not permitted. For amortizable intangible assets, the
new cost basis is amortized over the remaining useful life of
The discounted cash flow methodology uses projected future that asset. Unanticipated declines in our revenue generating
cash flows based on the reporting units’ earnings forecast. capability, adverse market or economic events, and regulatory
The discount rate used represents an estimate of the cost of actions, could result in material impairment charges in future
equity for that reporting unit based on the Capital Asset periods.
Pricing Model.
See Notes 2 and 10 to the financial statements for additional
At each annual goodwill impairment testing date, each of our information about goodwill and intangible assets.
reporting units with goodwill had a fair value that was
substantially in excess of its carrying value. Legal and Regulatory Contingencies
Intangible Assets In the normal course of business, we have been named, from
time to time, as a defendant in various legal actions, including
Intangible assets are initially recorded at cost, or in the arbitrations, class actions and other litigation, arising in
situation where acquired as part of a business combination, at connection with our activities as a global diversified financial
the fair value determined as part of the acquisition method of services institution.
accounting. Subsequently, amortizable intangible assets are
carried in the balance sheet at amortized cost, where Certain of the actual or threatened legal actions include claims
amortization is recognized over their estimated useful lives. for substantial compensatory and/or punitive damages or
Indefinite lived intangible assets are not amortized but are claims for indeterminate amounts of damages. In some cases,
tested for impairment on an annual basis as of July 1 and on the third-party entities that are, or would otherwise be, the
an interim basis when certain events or circumstances exist. primary defendants in such cases are bankrupt, in financial
distress, or may not honor applicable indemnification
On a quarterly basis: obligations. These actions have included, but are not limited
• All intangible assets are assessed for the presence of to, antitrust claims, claims under various false claims act
impairment indicators. Where such indicators are present, statutes, and matters arising from our sales and trading
an evaluation for impairment is conducted. businesses and our activities in the capital markets.
• For amortizable intangible assets, an impairment loss exists
if the carrying amount of the intangible asset is not We are also involved, from time to time, in other reviews,
recoverable and exceeds its fair value. The carrying amount investigations and proceedings (both formal and informal) by
of the intangible asset is not recoverable if it exceeds the governmental and self-regulatory agencies regarding our
sum of the expected undiscounted cash flows. business, and involving, among other matters, sales, trading,
• For indefinite-lived intangible assets, an impairment exists financing, prime brokerage, market-making activities,
if the carrying amount of the intangible asset exceeds its investment banking advisory services, capital markets
fair value. activities, financial products or offerings sponsored,
• Amortizable intangible assets are assessed for any underwritten or sold by us, wealth and investment
indication that the remaining useful life or the finite life management services, and accounting and operational
classification should be revised. In such cases, the matters, certain of which may result in adverse judgments,
remaining carrying amount is amortized prospectively over settlements, fines, penalties, disgorgement, restitution,
the revised useful life, unless it is determined that the life of forfeiture, injunctions, limitations on our ability to conduct
the intangible asset is indefinite, in which case the certain business, or other relief.
intangible asset is not amortized.
• Indefinite-lived intangible assets are assessed for any We contest liability and/or the amount of damages as
indication that the life of the intangible asset is no longer appropriate in each pending matter. Where available
indefinite; in such cases, the carrying amount of the information indicates that it is probable a liability had been
intangible asset is amortized prospectively over its incurred at the date of the financial statements and we can
remaining useful life.
47 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
reasonably estimate the amount of that loss or the range of Our provision for income taxes is composed of current and
loss, we accrue an estimated loss by a charge to income. deferred taxes. Current income taxes approximate taxes to be
paid or refunded for the current period. Deferred income taxes
In many legal proceedings and investigations, it is inherently reflect the net tax effects of temporary differences between
difficult to determine whether any loss is probable or the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities
reasonably possible, or to estimate the amount of any loss. In and are measured using the applicable enacted tax rates and
addition, even where we have determined that a loss is laws that will be in effect when such differences are expected
probable or reasonably possible or an exposure to loss or to reverse.
range of loss exists in excess of the liability already accrued
with respect to a previously recognized loss contingency, we Our deferred tax balances may also include deferred assets
are often unable to reasonably estimate the amount of the loss related to tax attribute carryforwards, such as net operating
or range of loss. It is particularly difficult to determine if a losses and tax credits that will be realized through reduction
loss is probable or reasonably possible, or to estimate the of future tax liabilities and, in some cases, are subject to
amount of loss, where the factual record is being developed or expiration if not utilized within certain periods. We perform
contested or where plaintiffs or government entities seek regular reviews to ascertain whether deferred tax assets are
substantial or indeterminate damages, restitution, forfeiture, realizable. These reviews include management’s estimates
disgorgement or penalties. Numerous issues may need to be and assumptions regarding future taxable income and
resolved in an investigation or proceeding before a incorporate various tax planning strategies, including
determination can be made that a loss or additional loss (or strategies that may be available to tax attribute carryforwards
range of loss or range of additional loss) is probable or before they expire.
reasonably possible, or to estimate the amount of loss,
including through potentially lengthy discovery or Once the deferred tax asset balances have been determined,
determination of important factual matters, determination of we may record a valuation allowance against the deferred tax
issues related to class certification, the calculation of damages asset balances to reflect the amount we estimate is more likely
or other relief, and consideration of novel or unsettled legal than not to be realized at a future date. Both current and
questions relevant to the proceedings or investigations in deferred income taxes may reflect adjustments related to our
question. unrecognized tax benefits.
Significant judgment is required in deciding when and if to Significant judgment is required in estimating the
make these accruals, and the actual cost of a legal claim or consolidated provision for (benefit from) income taxes,
regulatory fine/penalty may ultimately be materially different current and deferred tax balances (including valuation
from the recorded accruals. allowance, if any), accrued interest or penalties and uncertain
tax positions. Revisions in estimates and/or the actual costs of
See Note 14 to the financial statements for additional a tax assessment may ultimately be materially different from
information on legal contingencies. the recorded accruals and unrecognized tax benefits, if any.
Income Taxes See Note 2 to the financial statements for additional
information on our significant assumptions, judgments and
We are subject to the income tax laws of the U.S., its states interpretations associated with the accounting for income
and municipalities and those of the foreign jurisdictions in taxes and Note 21 to the financial statements for additional
which we have business operations. These tax laws are information on our tax examinations.
complex and subject to interpretation by the taxpayer and the
relevant governmental taxing authorities. We must make Liquidity and Capital Resources
judgments and interpretations about the application of these
inherently complex tax laws and make estimates about certain Our liquidity and capital policies are established and
items affecting taxable income when determining the maintained by senior management, with oversight by the
provision for income taxes in the various tax jurisdictions. Asset/Liability Management Committee and the Board.
Through various risk and control committees, senior
Disputes over interpretations of the tax laws may be settled management reviews business performance relative to these
with the taxing authority upon examination or audit. We policies, monitors the availability of alternative sources of
periodically evaluate the likelihood of assessments in each financing, and oversees the liquidity, interest rate and
taxing jurisdiction resulting from current and subsequent currency sensitivity of our asset and liability position. Our
years’ examinations, and unrecognized tax benefits related to Corporate Treasury department (“Treasury”), Firm Risk
potential losses that may arise from tax audits are established Committee, Asset/Liability Management Committee, and
in accordance with the relevant accounting guidance. Once other committees and control groups assist in evaluating,
established, unrecognized tax benefits are adjusted when there monitoring and managing the impact that our business
is more information available or when an event occurs activities have on our balance sheet, liquidity and capital
requiring a change. structure. Liquidity and capital matters are reported regularly
to the Board and the BRC.
December 2023 Form 10-K 48Table of Contents
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Balance Sheet $1,194 billion at December 31, 2023 were relatively
unchanged from $1,180 billion at December 31, 2022.
We monitor and evaluate the composition and size of our
balance sheet on a regular basis. Our balance sheet Liquidity Risk Management Framework
management process includes quarterly planning, business-
The primary goal of our Liquidity Risk Management
specific thresholds, monitoring of business-specific usage
Framework is to ensure that we have access to adequate
versus key performance metrics and new business impact
funding across a wide range of market conditions and time
assessments.
horizons. The framework is designed to enable us to fulfill
We establish balance sheet thresholds at the consolidated and our financial obligations and support the execution of our
business segment levels. We monitor balance sheet utilization business strategies.
and review variances resulting from business activity and
The following principles guide our Liquidity Risk
market fluctuations. On a regular basis, we review current
Management Framework:
performance versus established thresholds and assess the need
to re-allocate our balance sheet based on business segment
• Sufficient liquidity resources, which consist of HQLA and
needs. We also monitor key metrics, including asset and
cash deposits with banks (“Liquidity Resources”) should be
liability size and capital usage.
maintained to cover maturing liabilities and other planned
and contingent outflows;
Total Assets by Business Segment
• Maturity profile of assets and liabilities should be aligned,
At December 31, 2023 with limited reliance on short-term funding;
$ in millions IS WM IM Total
• Source, counterparty, currency, region and term of funding
Assets
should be diversified; and
Cash and cash equivalents $ 72,928 $ 16,172 $ 132 $ 89,232
• Liquidity Stress Tests should anticipate, and account for,
Trading assets at fair value 353,841 7,962 5,271 367,074
periods of limited access to funding.
Investment securities 39,212 115,595 — 154,807
Securities purchased under
agreements to resell 90,701 20,039 — 110,740 The core components of our Liquidity Risk Management
Securities borrowed 119,823 1,268 — 121,091 Framework are the Required Liquidity Framework, Liquidity
Customer and other receivables 47,333 31,237 1,535 80,105 Stress Tests and Liquidity Resources, which support our
Loans1 72,110 146,526 4 218,640 target liquidity profile.
Goodwill 424 10,199 6,084 16,707
Intangible assets 26 3,427 3,602 7,055 Required Liquidity Framework
Other assets2 14,108 12,743 1,391 28,242
Total assets $ 810,506 $ 365,168 $ 18,019 $ 1,193,693 Our Required Liquidity Framework establishes the amount of
At December 31, 2022 liquidity we must hold in both normal and stressed
$ in millions IS WM IM Total environments to ensure that our financial condition and
Assets overall soundness are not adversely affected by an inability
Cash and cash equivalents $ 88,362 $ 39,539 $ 226 $ 128,127 (or perceived inability) to meet our financial obligations in a
Trading assets at fair value 294,884 1,971 4,460 301,315 timely manner. The Required Liquidity Framework considers
Investment securities 40,481 119,450 — 159,931
the most constraining liquidity requirement to satisfy all
Securities purchased under
agreements to resell 102,511 11,396 — 113,907 regulatory and internal limits at a consolidated and legal
Securities borrowed 132,619 755 — 133,374 entity level.
Customer and other receivables 47,515 29,620 1,405 78,540
Loans1 67,676 146,105 4 213,785 Liquidity Stress Tests
Goodwill 429 10,202 6,021 16,652
We use Liquidity Stress Tests to model external and
Intangible assets 36 3,911 3,671 7,618
Other assets2 15,324 10,356 1,302 26,982 intercompany liquidity flows across multiple scenarios and a
Total assets $ 789,837 $ 373,305 $ 17,089 $ 1,180,231 range of time horizons. These scenarios contain various
1. Amounts include loans held for investment, net of ACL, and loans held for sale but combinations of idiosyncratic and systemic stress events of
exclude loans at fair value, which are included in Trading assets in the balance different severity and duration. The methodology,
sheet (see Note 9 to the financial statements).
2. Other assets primarily includes premises, equipment and software, ROU assets implementation, production and analysis of our Liquidity
related to leases, other investments and deferred tax assets. Stress Tests are important components of the Required
Liquidity Framework.
A substantial portion of total assets consists of cash and cash
equivalents, liquid marketable securities and short-term
The assumptions used in our various Liquidity Stress Test
receivables. In the Institutional Securities business segment,
scenarios include, but are not limited to, the following:
these arise from market-making, financing and prime
brokerage activities, and in the Wealth Management business
• No government support;
segment, these arise from banking activities, including
• No access to equity and limited access to unsecured debt
management of the investment portfolio. Total assets of
markets;
49 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
• Repayment of all unsecured debt maturing within the stress Liquidity Resources by Type of Investment
horizon;
Average Daily Balance
• Higher haircuts for and significantly lower availability of Three Months Ended
secured funding; December 31, September 30,
• Additional collateral that would be required by trading $ in millions 2023 2023
Cash deposits with central banks $ 64,205 $ 66,330
counterparties, certain exchanges and clearing
Unencumbered HQLA securities1:
organizations related to credit rating downgrades;
U.S. government obligations 137,635 122,110
• Additional collateral that would be required due to
U.S. agency and agency mortgage-backed
collateral substitutions, collateral disputes and uncalled securities 83,733 86,628
collateral; Non-U.S. sovereign obligations2 20,117 23,416
• Discretionary unsecured debt buybacks; Other investment grade securities 678 693
• Drawdowns on lending commitments provided to third Total HQLA1 $ 306,368 $ 299,177
parties; and Cash deposits with banks (non-HQLA) 8,136 8,190
• Client cash withdrawals and reduction in customer short Total Liquidity Resources $ 314,504 $ 307,367
positions that fund long positions. 1. HQLA is presented prior to applying weightings and includes all HQLA held in
subsidiaries.
2. Primarily composed of unencumbered French, Japanese, U.K., German and
Liquidity Stress Tests are produced and results are reported at Spanish government obligations.
different levels, including major operating subsidiaries and
Liquidity Resources by Bank and Non-Bank Legal Entities
major currencies, to capture specific cash requirements and
cash availability across the Firm, including a limited number Average Daily Balance
of asset sales in a stressed environment. The Liquidity Stress Three Months Ended
Tests assume that subsidiaries will use their own liquidity first December 31, September 30,
$ in millions 2023 2023
to fund their obligations before drawing liquidity from the
Bank legal entities
Parent Company and that the Parent Company will support its U.S. $ 132,870 $ 132,663
subsidiaries and will not have access to subsidiaries’ liquidity Non-U.S. 5,359 6,101
reserves. In addition to the assumptions underpinning the Total Bank legal entities 138,229 138,764
Liquidity Stress Tests, we take into consideration settlement Non-Bank legal entities
risk related to intraday settlement and clearing of securities U.S.:
and financing activities. Parent Company 58,494 53,681
Non-Parent Company 56,459 58,839
At December 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, Total U.S. 114,953 112,520
we maintained sufficient Liquidity Resources to meet current Non-U.S. 61,322 56,083
and contingent funding obligations as modeled in our Total Non-Bank legal entities 176,275 168,603
Liquidity Stress Tests. Total Liquidity Resources $ 314,504 $ 307,367
Liquidity Resources Liquidity Resources may fluctuate from period to period
based on the overall size and composition of our balance
We maintain sufficient Liquidity Resources to cover daily sheet, the maturity profile of our unsecured debt, and
funding needs and to meet strategic liquidity targets sized by estimates of funding needs in a stressed environment, among
the Required Liquidity Framework and Liquidity Stress Tests. other factors.
We actively manage the amount of our Liquidity Resources
considering the following components: unsecured debt Regulatory Liquidity Framework
maturity profile; balance sheet size and composition; funding
Liquidity Coverage Ratio and Net Stable Funding Ratio
needs in a stressed environment, inclusive of contingent cash
outflows; legal entity, regional and segment liquidity
We and our U.S. Bank Subsidiaries are required to maintain a
requirements; regulatory requirements; and collateral
minimum LCR and NSFR of 100%.
requirements.
The LCR rule requires large banking organizations to have
The amount of Liquidity Resources we hold is based on our
sufficient Eligible HQLA to cover net cash outflows arising
risk appetite and is calibrated to meet various internal and
from significant stress over 30 calendar days, thus promoting
regulatory requirements and to fund prospective business
the short-term resilience of the liquidity risk profile of
activities. The Liquidity Resources are primarily held within
banking organizations. In determining Eligible HQLA for
the Parent Company and its major operating subsidiaries. The
LCR purposes, weightings (or asset haircuts) are applied to
Total HQLA values in the tables immediately following are
HQLA, and certain HQLA held in subsidiaries is excluded.
different from Eligible HQLA, which, in accordance with the
LCR rule, also takes into account certain regulatory
The NSFR rule requires large banking organizations to
weightings and other operational considerations.
maintain an amount of available stable funding, which is their
regulatory capital and liabilities subject to standardized
weightings, equal to or greater than their required stable
December 2023 Form 10-K 50Table of Contents
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
funding, which is their projected minimum funding needs, provides us with flexibility in managing the composition of
over a one-year time horizon. our balance sheet. Secured financing investors principally
focus on the quality of the eligible collateral posted.
As of December 31, 2023, we and our U.S. Bank Subsidiaries Accordingly, we actively manage our secured financings
are compliant with the minimum LCR and NSFR based on the quality of the assets being funded.
requirements of 100%.
We have established longer-tenor secured funding
Liquidity Coverage Ratio requirements for less liquid asset classes, for which funding
Average Daily Balance may be at risk in the event of a market disruption. We define
Three Months Ended
highly liquid assets as government-issued or government-
December 31, September 30,
$ in millions 2023 2023 guaranteed securities with a high degree of fundability and
Eligible HQLA1 less liquid assets as those that do not meet these criteria.
Cash deposits with central banks $ 58,047 $ 60,163
Securities2 194,970 181,010 To further minimize the refinancing risk of secured financing
Total Eligible HQLA1 $ 253,017 $ 241,173 for less liquid assets, we have established concentration limits
Net cash outflows $ 196,488 $ 190,336 to diversify our investor base and reduce the amount of
LCR 129 % 127 % monthly maturities for secured financing of less liquid assets.
As a component of the Liquidity Risk Management
1. Under the LCR rule, Eligible HQLA is calculated using weightings and excluding
certain HQLA held in subsidiaries. Framework, we hold a portion of our Liquidity Resources
2. Primarily includes U.S. Treasuries, U.S. agency mortgage-backed securities,
against the potential disruption to our secured financing
sovereign bonds and investment grade corporate bonds.
capabilities.
Net Stable Funding Ratio
In general, we maintain a pool of liquid and easily fundable
Average Daily Balance securities, which takes into account HQLA classifications
Three Months Ended
consistent with LCR definitions, and other regulatory
December 31, September 30,
$ in millions 2023 2023 requirements, and provides a valuable future source of
Available stable funding $ 555,884 $ 553,413 liquidity.
Required stable funding 465,226 468,290
NSFR 120 % 118 % Collateralized Financing Transactions
At At
Funding Management
December 31, December 31,
$ in millions 2023 2022
We manage our funding in a manner that reduces the risk of Securities purchased under agreements to
disruption to our operations. We pursue a strategy of resell and Securities borrowed $ 231,831 $ 247,281
Securities sold under agreements to
diversification of secured and unsecured funding sources (by
repurchase and Securities loaned $ 77,708 $ 78,213
product, investor and region) and attempt to ensure that the Securities received as collateral1 $ 6,219 $ 9,954
tenor of our liabilities equals or exceeds the expected holding
Average Daily Balance
period of the assets being financed. Our goal is to achieve an Three Months Ended
optimal mix of durable secured and unsecured financing. December 31, December 31,
$ in millions 2023 2022
We fund our balance sheet on a global basis through diverse Securities purchased under agreements to
resell and Securities borrowed $ 235,928 $ 261,627
sources. These sources include our equity capital, borrowings,
Securities sold under agreements to
bank notes, securities sold under agreements to repurchase, repurchase and Securities loaned $ 87,285 $ 77,268
securities lending, deposits, letters of credit and lines of
1. Included within Trading assets in the balance sheet.
credit. We have active financing programs for both standard
and structured products targeting global investors and See “Total Assets by Business Segment” herein for additional
currencies. information on the assets shown in the previous table and
Notes 2 and 8 to the financial statements for additional
Treasury allocates interest expense to our businesses based on information on collateralized financing transactions.
the tenor and interest rate profile of the assets being funded.
Treasury similarly allocates interest income to businesses In addition to the collateralized financing transactions shown
carrying deposit products and other liabilities across the in the previous table, we engage in financing transactions
businesses based on the characteristics of those deposits and collateralized by customer-owned securities, which are
other liabilities. segregated in accordance with regulatory requirements.
Receivables under these financing transactions, primarily
Secured Financing margin loans, are included in Customer and other receivables
in the balance sheet, and payables under these financing
The liquid nature of the marketable securities and short-term
transactions, primarily to prime brokerage customers, are
receivables arising principally from sales and trading
included in Customer and other payables in the balance sheet.
activities in the Institutional Securities business segment
Our risk exposure on these transactions is mitigated by
51 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
collateral maintenance policies and the elements of our Borrowings by Remaining Maturity at December 31, 20231
Liquidity Risk Management Framework.
Parent
$ in millions Company Subsidiaries Total
Unsecured Financing
Original maturities of one year or less $ — $ 3,188 $ 3,188
Original maturities greater than one year
We view deposits and borrowings as stable sources of funding 2024 $ 8,915 $ 11,236 $ 20,151
for unencumbered securities and non-security assets. Our 2025 22,030 13,493 35,523
unsecured financings include borrowings and certificates of 2026 24,516 10,907 35,423
deposit carried at fair value, which are primarily composed of: 2027 19,282 6,056 25,338
instruments whose payments and redemption values are 2028 11,432 9,807 21,239
linked to the performance of a specific index, a basket of Thereafter 90,635 32,235 122,870
stocks, a specific equity security, a commodity, a credit Total greater than one year $ 176,810 $ 83,734 $ 260,544
exposure or basket of credit exposures; and instruments with Total $ 176,810 $ 86,922 $ 263,732
various interest rate-related features, including step-ups, step- 1. Original maturity in the table is generally based on contractual final maturity. For
downs and zero coupons. Also included are unsecured borrowings with put options, remaining maturity represents the earliest put date.
contracts that are not classified as OTC derivatives because
Borrowings of $264 billion at December 31, 2023 increased
they fail initial net investment criteria. As part of our asset/
from $238 billion at December 31, 2022, primarily due to
liability management strategy, when appropriate, we use
issuances net of maturities and redemptions and mark-to-
derivatives to make adjustments to the interest rate risk profile
market adjustments on equity-linked borrowings driven by
of our borrowings (see Notes 6 and 13 to the financial
market factors.
statements).
We believe that accessing debt investors through multiple
Deposits distribution channels helps provide consistent access to the
unsecured markets. In addition, the issuance of borrowings
At At
December 31, December 31, with original maturities greater than one year allows us to
$ in millions 2023 2022 reduce reliance on short-term credit-sensitive instruments.
Savings and demand deposits:
Borrowings with original maturities greater than one year are
Brokerage sweep deposits1 $ 148,274 $ 202,592
generally managed to achieve staggered maturities, thereby
Savings and other 139,978 117,356
mitigating refinancing risk, and to maximize investor
Total Savings and demand deposits 288,252 319,948
diversification through sales to global institutional and retail
Time deposits 63,552 36,698
Total2 $ 351,804 $ 356,646 clients across regions, currencies and product types.
1. Amounts represent balances swept from client brokerage accounts. The availability and cost of financing to us can vary
2. As of December 31, 2023, there were no off-balance sheet amounts excluded from
deposits. As of December 31, 2022, approximately $6 billion of off-balance sheet depending on market conditions, the volume of certain trading
amounts were excluded from deposits at unaffiliated financial institutions. and lending activities, our credit ratings and the overall
Deposits are primarily sourced from our Wealth Management availability of credit. We also engage in, and may continue to
clients and are considered to have stable, low-cost funding engage in, repurchases of our borrowings as part of our
characteristics relative to other sources of funding. Each market-making activities.
category of deposits presented above has a different cost
For further information on Borrowings, see Note 13 to the
profile and clients may respond differently to changes in
financial statements.
interest rates and other macroeconomic conditions. The
decrease in total deposits in 2023 was primarily driven by a
Credit Ratings
continued reduction in Brokerage sweep deposits, largely due
to net outflows to alternative cash equivalent and other
We rely on external sources to finance a significant portion of
products, partially offset by an increase in Time deposits and
our daily operations. Our credit ratings are one of the factors
Savings.
in the cost and availability of financing and can have an
impact on certain trading revenues, particularly in those
businesses where longer-term counterparty performance is a
key consideration, such as certain OTC derivative
transactions. When determining credit ratings, rating agencies
consider both company-specific and industry-wide factors.
See also “Risk Factors—Liquidity Risk.”
December 2023 Form 10-K 52Table of Contents
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Parent Company and U.S. Bank Subsidiaries Issuer Ratings Common Stock Repurchases
at February 16, 2024
in millions, except for per share data 2023 2022 2021
Parent Company
Number of shares 62 113 126
Short-Term Long-Term Rating
Debt Debt Outlook Average price per share $ 85.35 $ 87.25 $ 91.13
DBRS, Inc. R-1 (middle) A (high) Stable Total $ 5,300 $ 9,865 $ 11,464
Fitch Ratings, Inc. F1 A+ Stable
Moody’s Investors Service, Inc. P-1 A1 Stable For additional information on our common stock repurchases,
Rating and Investment see “Liquidity and Capital Resources—Regulatory
Information, Inc. a-1 A+ Stable
Requirements—Capital Plans, Stress Tests and the Stress
S&P Global Ratings A-2 A- Stable
Capital Buffer” herein and Note 17 to the financial
MSBNA statements.
Short-Term Long-Term Rating
Debt Debt Outlook
For a description of our capital plan, see “Liquidity and
Fitch Ratings, Inc. F1+ AA- Stable
Capital Resources—Regulatory Requirements—Capital
Moody’s Investors Service, Inc. P-1 Aa3 Stable
Plans, Stress Tests and the Stress Capital Buffer” herein.
S&P Global Ratings A-1 A+ Stable
MSPBNA Common Stock Dividend Announcement
Short-Term Long-Term Rating
Debt Debt Outlook Announcement date January 16, 2024
Moody’s Investors Service, Inc. P-1 Aa3 Stable Amount per share $0.85
S&P Global Ratings A-1 A+ Stable Date paid February 15, 2024
Shareholders of record as of January 31, 2024
Incremental Collateral or Terminating Payments
For additional information on our common stock dividends,
In connection with certain OTC derivatives and certain other see “Liquidity and Capital Resources—Regulatory
agreements where we are a liquidity provider to certain Requirements—Capital Plans, Stress Tests and the Stress
financing vehicles associated with the Institutional Securities Capital Buffer” herein.
business segment, we may be required to provide additional
For additional information on our common stock and
collateral, immediately settle any outstanding liability
information on our preferred stock, see Note 17 to the
balances with certain counterparties or pledge additional
financial statements.
collateral to certain clearing organizations in the event of a
future credit rating downgrade irrespective of whether we are
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
in a net asset or net liability position. See Note 6 to the
financial statements for additional information on OTC
We enter into various off-balance sheet arrangements,
derivatives that contain such contingent features.
including through unconsolidated SPEs and lending-related
financial instruments (e.g., guarantees and commitments),
While certain aspects of a credit rating downgrade are
primarily in connection with the Institutional Securities and
quantifiable pursuant to contractual provisions, the impact it
Investment Management business segments.
would have on our business and results of operations in future
periods is inherently uncertain and would depend on a number
We utilize SPEs primarily in connection with securitization
of interrelated factors, including, among other things, the
activities. For information on our securitization activities, see
magnitude of the downgrade, the rating relative to peers, the
Note 15 to the financial statements.
rating assigned by the relevant agency before the downgrade,
individual client behavior and future mitigating actions we For information on our commitments, obligations under
might take. The liquidity impact of additional collateral certain guarantee arrangements and indemnities, see Note 14
requirements is included in our Liquidity Stress Tests. to the financial statements. For a further discussion of our
lending commitments, see “Quantitative and Qualitative
Capital Management
Disclosures about Risk—Credit Risk—Loans and Lending
Commitments” herein.
We view capital as an important source of financial strength
and actively manage our consolidated capital position based
Regulatory Requirements
upon, among other things, business opportunities, risks,
capital availability and rates of return together with internal
Regulatory Capital Framework
capital policies, regulatory requirements and rating agency
guidelines. In the future, we may expand or contract our We are an FHC under the BHC Act and are subject to the
capital base to address the changing needs of our businesses. regulation and oversight of the Federal Reserve. The Federal
Reserve establishes capital requirements for us, including
“well-capitalized” standards, and evaluates our compliance
with such capital requirements. The OCC establishes similar
capital requirements and standards for our U.S. Bank
53 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Subsidiaries. The regulatory capital requirements are largely buffer requirement computed under the applicable advanced
based on the Basel III capital standards established by the approaches for calculating credit risk, market risk and
Basel Committee and also implement certain provisions of the operational risk RWAs (“Advanced Approach”) is equal to
Dodd-Frank Act. For us to remain an FHC, we must remain our 2.5% capital conservation buffer, G-SIB capital surcharge
well-capitalized in accordance with standards established by and CCyB.
the Federal Reserve, and our U.S. Bank Subsidiaries must
remain well-capitalized in accordance with standards Risk-Based Regulatory Capital Ratio Requirements
established by the OCC. In addition, many of our regulated At December
At At 31, 2023 and
subsidiaries are subject to regulatory capital requirements, December 31, December 31, December 31,
2023 2022 2022
including regulated subsidiaries registered as swap dealers Regulatory
Minimum Standardized Standardized Advanced
with the CFTC or conditionally registered as security-based
Required ratios1
swap dealers with the SEC or registered as broker-dealers or
Common Equity
futures commission merchants. For additional information on Tier 1 capital
ratio 4.5% 12.9% 13.3% 10.0%
regulatory capital requirements for our U.S. Bank
Tier 1 capital
Subsidiaries, as well as our subsidiaries that are swap entities, ratio 6.0% 14.4% 14.8% 11.5%
see Note 16 to the financial statements. Total capital
ratio 8.0% 16.4% 16.8% 13.5%
Regulatory Capital Requirements 1. Required ratios represent the regulatory minimum plus the capital buffer
requirement.
We are required to maintain minimum risk-based and Risk-Weighted Assets. RWA reflects both our on- and off-
leverage-based capital and TLAC ratios. For additional balance sheet risk, as well as capital charges attributable to
information on TLAC, see “Total Loss-Absorbing Capacity, the risk of loss arising from the following:
Long-Term Debt and Clean Holding Company Requirements”
herein. • Credit risk: The failure of a borrower, counterparty or
issuer to meet its financial obligations to us;
Risk-Based Regulatory Capital. Risk-based capital ratio • Market risk: Adverse changes in the level of one or more
requirements apply to Common Equity Tier 1 capital, Tier 1 market prices, rates, spreads, indices, volatilities,
capital and Total capital (which includes Tier 2 capital), each correlations or other market factors, such as market
as a percentage of RWA, and consist of regulatory minimum liquidity; and
required ratios plus our capital buffer requirement. Capital • Operational risk: Inadequate or failed processes or systems,
requirements require certain adjustments to, and deductions from human factors or from external events (e.g., fraud,
from, capital for purposes of determining these ratios. theft, legal and compliance risks, cyber attacks or damage
to physical assets).
Capital Buffer Requirements
Our risk-based capital ratios are computed under each of
At December
At At 31, 2023 and (i) the Standardized Approach and (ii) the Advanced
December 31, December 31, December 31,
Approach. The credit risk RWA calculations between the two
2023 2022 2022
Standardized Standardized Advanced approaches differ in that the Standardized Approach requires
Capital buffers calculation of RWA using prescribed risk weights and
Capital conservation buffer — — 2.5% exposure methodologies, whereas the Advanced Approach
SCB1 5.4% 5.8% N/A utilizes models to calculate exposure amounts and risk
G-SIB capital surcharge2 3.0% 3.0% 3.0% weights. At December 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, the
CCyB3 0% 0% 0% differences between the actual and required ratios were lower
Capital buffer requirement 8.4% 8.8% 5.5% under the Standardized Approach.
1. For additional information on the SCB, see “Capital Plans, Stress Tests and the
Stress Capital Buffer” herein. Leverage-Based Regulatory Capital. Leverage-based capital
2. For a further discussion of the G-SIB capital surcharge, see “G-SIB Capital
requirements include a minimum Tier 1 leverage ratio of 4%,
Surcharge” herein.
3. The CCyB can be set up to 2.5% but is currently set by the Federal Reserve at a minimum SLR of 3% and an enhanced SLR capital buffer
zero.
of at least 2%.
The capital buffer requirement represents the amount of
Common Equity Tier 1 capital we must maintain above the CECL Deferral. Beginning on January 1, 2020, we elected to
minimum risk-based capital requirements in order to avoid defer the effect of the adoption of CECL on our risk-based
restrictions on our ability to make capital distributions, and leverage-based capital amounts and ratios, as well as our
including the payment of dividends and the repurchase of RWA, adjusted average assets and supplementary leverage
stock, and to pay discretionary bonuses to executive officers. exposure calculations, over a five-year transition period. The
Our capital buffer requirement computed under the deferral impacts began to phase in at 25% per year from
standardized approaches for calculating credit risk and market January 1, 2022 and are phased-in at 50% from January 1,
RWAs (“Standardized Approach”) is equal to the sum of our 2023. The deferral impacts will become fully phased-in
SCB, G-SIB capital surcharge and CCyB, and our capital beginning on January 1, 2025.
December 2023 Form 10-K 54Table of Contents
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Regulatory Capital Ratios Regulatory Capital
Required At December 31, Required At December 31, At At
$ in millions Ratio1 2023 Ratio1 2022 December 31, December 31,
Risk-based capital— $ in millions 2023 2022 Change
Standardized Common Equity Tier 1 capital
Common Equity Tier 1 Common shareholders’ equity $ 90,288 $ 91,391 $ (1,103)
capital $ 69,448 $ 68,670
Regulatory adjustments and
Tier 1 capital 78,183 77,191 deductions:
Total capital 88,874 86,575 Net goodwill (16,394) (16,393) (1)
Total RWA 456,053 447,849 Net intangible assets (5,509) (6,048) 539
Common Equity Impact of CECL transition 124 185 (61)
Tier 1 capital
ratio 12.9% 15.2% 13.3% 15.3% Other adjustments and
deductions1 939 (465) 1,404
Tier 1 capital
ratio 14.4% 17.1% 14.8% 17.2% Total Common Equity Tier 1
capital $ 69,448 $ 68,670 $ 778
Total capital ratio 16.4% 19.5% 16.8% 19.3%
Additional Tier 1 capital
Preferred stock $ 8,750 $ 8,750 $ —
Required At December 31, At December 31,
$ in millions Ratio1 2023 2022 Noncontrolling interests 758 552 206
Risk-based capital— Additional Tier 1 capital $ 9,508 $ 9,302 $ 206
Advanced
Deduction for investments in
Common Equity Tier 1 covered funds (773) (781) 8
capital $ 69,448 $ 68,670 Total Tier 1 capital $ 78,183 $ 77,191 $ 992
Tier 1 capital 78,183 77,191 Standardized Tier 2 capital
Total capital 88,190 86,159 Subordinated debt $ 8,760 $ 7,846 $ 914
Total RWA 448,154 438,806 Eligible ACL 2,051 1,613 438
Common Equity Tier 1
capital ratio 10.0% 15.5% 15.6% Other adjustments and deductions (120) (75) (45)
Total Standardized Tier 2
Tier 1 capital ratio 11.5% 17.4% 17.6%
capital $ 10,691 $ 9,384 $ 1,307
Total capital ratio 13.5% 19.7% 19.6% Total Standardized capital $ 88,874 $ 86,575 $ 2,299
Required At December 31, At December 31, Advanced Tier 2 capital
$ in millions Ratio1 2023 2022 Subordinated debt $ 8,760 $ 7,846 $ 914
Leverage-based capital Eligible credit reserves 1,367 1,197 170
Adjusted average assets2 $ 1,159,626 $ 1,150,772 Other adjustments and
Tier 1 leverage ratio 4.0% 6.7% 6.7% deductions (120) (75) (45)
Supplementary Total Advanced Tier 2 capital $ 10,007 $ 8,968 $ 1,039
leverage exposure3 $ 1,429,552 $ 1,399,403 Total Advanced capital $ 88,190 $ 86,159 $ 2,031
SLR 5.0% 5.5% 5.5%
1. Other adjustments and deductions used in the calculation of Common Equity Tier 1
1. Required ratios are inclusive of any buffers applicable as of the date presented. capital primarily includes net after-tax DVA, the credit spread premium over risk-free
2. Adjusted average assets represents the denominator of the Tier 1 leverage ratio rate for derivative liabilities, defined benefit pension plan assets, after-tax gain on
and is composed of the average daily balance of consolidated on-balance sheet sale from assets sold into securitizations, investments in our own capital
assets for the quarters ending on the respective balance sheet dates, reduced by instruments and certain deferred tax assets.
disallowed goodwill, intangible assets, investments in covered funds, defined
benefit pension plan assets, after-tax gain on sale from assets sold into
securitizations, investments in our own capital instruments, certain deferred tax
assets and other capital deductions.
3. Supplementary leverage exposure is the sum of Adjusted average assets used in
the Tier 1 leverage ratio and other adjustments, primarily: (i) for
derivatives, potential future exposure and the effective notional principal amount of
sold credit protection offset by qualifying purchased credit protection; (ii) the
counterparty credit risk for repo-style transactions; and (iii) the credit equivalent
amount for off-balance sheet exposures.
55 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
RWA Rollforward interconnectedness, cross-jurisdictional activity, and
complexity and substitutability (“Method 1”) or use of short-
$ in millions Standardized Advanced
term wholesale funding (“Method 2”), whichever is higher.
Credit risk RWA
Balance at December 31, 2022 $ 397,275 $ 285,638
Total Loss-Absorbing Capacity, Long-Term Debt and
Change related to the following items:
Clean Holding Company Requirements
Derivatives 6,065 660
Securities financing transactions 2,924 (354)
The Federal Reserve has established external TLAC, long-
Investment securities (1,316) 385
term debt (“LTD”) and clean holding company requirements
Commitments, guarantees and loans (2,606) 6,903
for top-tier BHCs of U.S. G-SIBs (“covered BHCs”),
Equity investments 1,621 1,964
including the Parent Company. These requirements are
Other credit risk 3,768 2,662
Total change in credit risk RWA $ 10,456 $ 12,220 designed to ensure that covered BHCs will have enough loss-
Balance at December 31, 2023 $ 407,731 $ 297,858 absorbing resources at the point of failure to be recapitalized
Market risk RWA through the conversion of eligible LTD to equity or otherwise
Balance at December 31, 2022 $ 50,574 $ 50,563 by imposing losses on eligible LTD or other forms of TLAC
Change related to the following items: where an SPOE resolution strategy is used (see “Business—
Regulatory VaR (3,946) (3,946) Supervision and Regulation—Financial Holding Company—
Regulatory stressed VaR (5,017) (5,017) Resolution and Recovery Planning” and “Risk Factors—
Incremental risk charge 94 94 Legal, Regulatory and Compliance Risk”).
Comprehensive risk measure 341 231
Specific risk 6,276 6,276 These TLAC and eligible LTD requirements include various
Total change in market risk RWA $ (2,252) $ (2,362) restrictions, such as requiring eligible LTD to: be issued by
Balance at December 31, 2023 $ 48,322 $ 48,201 the covered BHC; be unsecured; have a maturity of one year
Operational risk RWA
or more from the date of issuance; and not contain certain
Balance at December 31, 2022 N/A $ 102,605
embedded features, such as a principal or redemption amount
Change in operational risk RWA N/A (510)
subject to reduction based on the performance of an asset,
Balance at December 31, 2023 N/A $ 102,095
entity or index, or a similar feature. In addition, the
Total RWA $ 456,053 $ 448,154
requirements provide permanent grandfathering for debt
Regulatory VaR—VaR for regulatory capital requirements
instruments issued prior to December 31, 2016 that would be
eligible LTD but for having impermissible acceleration
In 2023, Credit risk RWA increased under the Standardized
clauses or being governed by foreign law.
and Advanced Approaches. Under the Standardized
Approach, the increase was primarily driven by higher
A covered BHC is also required to maintain minimum
derivatives, higher securities financing transactions, higher
external TLAC equal to the greater of (i) 18% of total RWA
equity investments, as well as an increase in Other credit risk
or (ii) 7.5% of its total leverage exposure (the denominator of
driven by higher deferred tax assets and securitizations. These
its SLR). Covered BHCs must also meet a minimum external
increases were partially offset by decreases in lending
LTD requirement equal to the greater of (i) total RWA
activity. Under the Advanced Approach, the increase was
multiplied by the sum of 6% plus the higher of the Method 1
primarily driven by growth in Corporate lending, higher
or Method 2 G-SIB capital surcharge applicable to the Parent
equity investments, higher derivatives, as well as increase in
Company or (ii) 4.5% of its total leverage exposure.
Other credit risk driven by higher deferred tax assets and
securitizations.
TLAC buffer requirements are imposed on top of both the
risk-based and leverage exposure-based external TLAC
Market risk RWA decreased in 2023 under both the
minimum requirements. The risk-based TLAC buffer is equal
Standardized and Advanced Approaches, primarily due to
to the sum of 2.5%, our Method 1 G-SIB surcharge and the
lower Regulatory VaR and stressed VaR driven by reductions
CCyB, if any, as a percentage of total RWA. The leverage
in macro and commodities businesses, partially offset by
exposure-based TLAC buffer is equal to 2% of our total
higher Specific risk charges on securitization and non-
leverage exposure. Failure to maintain the buffers would
securitization standardized charges.
result in restrictions on our ability to make capital
distributions, including the payment of dividends and the
Operational risk RWA in 2023 remained relatively
repurchase of stock, and to pay discretionary bonuses to
unchanged.
executive officers.
G-SIB Capital Surcharge
We and other U.S. G-SIBs are subject to an additional risk-
based capital surcharge, the G-SIB capital surcharge, which
must be satisfied using Common Equity Tier 1 capital and
which functions as an extension of the capital conservation
buffer. The surcharge is calculated based on the G-SIB’s size,
December 2023 Form 10-K 56Table of Contents
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Required and Actual TLAC and Eligible LTD Ratios capital. The capital plan must include a discussion of how we
will maintain capital above the minimum regulatory capital
Actual
Amount/Ratio ratios and how we will serve as a source of strength to our
At At U.S. Bank Subsidiaries under supervisory stress scenarios. In
Regulatory Required December 31, December 31,
$ in millions Minimum Ratio1 2023 2022 addition, the Federal Reserve has issued guidance setting out
External TLAC2 $ 250,914 $ 245,951 its heightened expectations for capital planning practices at
External TLAC as a % certain large financial institutions, including us.
of RWA 18.0% 21.5% 55.0% 54.9%
External TLAC as a %
of leverage exposure 7.5% 9.5% 17.6% 17.6% As part of its annual capital supervisory stress testing process,
Eligible LTD3 $ 162,547 $ 159,444 the Federal Reserve determines an SCB for each large BHC,
Eligible LTD as a % of including us. The SCB applies only with respect to
RWA 9.0% 9.0% 35.6% 35.6%
Standardized Approach risk-based capital requirements and
Eligible LTD as a % of
leverage exposure 4.5% 4.5% 11.4% 11.4% replaced the Common Equity Tier 1 capital conservation
buffer of 2.5%. The SCB is the greater of (i) the maximum
1. Required ratios are inclusive of applicable buffers.
2. External TLAC consists of Common Equity Tier 1 capital and Additional Tier 1 decline in our Common Equity Tier 1 capital ratio under the
capital (each excluding any noncontrolling minority interests), as well as eligible severely adverse scenario over the supervisory stress test
LTD.
3. Consists of TLAC-eligible LTD reduced by 50% for amounts of unpaid principal due measurement period plus the sum of the four quarters of
to be paid in more than one year but less than two years from each respective planned common stock dividends divided by the projected
balance sheet date.
RWAs from the quarter in which the Firm’s projected
Furthermore, under the clean holding company requirements, Common Equity Tier 1 capital ratio reaches its minimum in
a covered BHC is prohibited from incurring any external debt the supervisory stress test and (ii) 2.5%.
with an original maturity of less than one year or certain other
liabilities, regardless of whether the liabilities are fully The supervisory stress test assumes that BHCs generally
secured or otherwise senior to eligible LTD, or entering into maintain a constant level of assets and RWAs throughout the
certain other prohibited transactions. Certain other external projection period.
liabilities, including those with certain embedded features
A firm’s SCB is subject to revision each year, taking effect
noted above, are subject to a cap equal to 5% of the covered
from October 1 to reflect the results of the Federal Reserve’s
BHC’s outstanding external TLAC amount. Additionally, as
annual supervisory stress test. The Federal Reserve has
of April 1, 2021, we and our U.S. Bank Subsidiaries are
discretion to recalculate a firm’s SCB outside of the October 1
required to make certain deductions from regulatory capital
annual cycle and to require approval for certain actions, in
for investments in certain unsecured debt instruments
some circumstances. The Federal Reserve also has the
(including eligible LTD in the TLAC framework) issued by
authority to impose restrictions on capital actions as a
the Parent Company or other G-SIBs.
supervisory matter.
We are in compliance with all TLAC requirements as of
For the 2023 capital planning and stress test cycle, we
December 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022.
submitted our capital plan and company-run stress test results
Capital Plans, Stress Tests and the Stress Capital Buffer to the Federal Reserve on April 5, 2023. On June 28, 2023,
the Federal Reserve published summary results of its
The Federal Reserve has capital planning and stress test supervisory stress tests of each large BHC, in which the
requirements for large BHCs, which form part of the Federal projected decline in our Common Equity Tier 1 ratio in the
Reserve’s annual CCAR framework. severely adverse scenario improved from the prior annual
supervisory stress test by 50 basis points, from 4.6% to 4.1%.
We must submit, on at least an annual basis, a capital plan to Following the publication of the supervisory stress test
the Federal Reserve, taking into account the results of results, and as a result of the increase in our common stock
separate annual stress tests designed by us and the Federal dividend and the resulting dividend add-on, we announced
Reserve, so that the Federal Reserve may assess our systems that our SCB will be 5.4% from October 1, 2023 through
and processes that incorporate forward-looking projections of September 30, 2024. Together with other features of the
revenues and losses to monitor and maintain our internal regulatory capital framework, this SCB results in an aggregate
capital adequacy. As banks with less than $250 billion of total Standardized Approach Common Equity Tier 1 ratio of
assets, our U.S. Bank Subsidiaries are not subject to 12.9%.
company-run stress test regulatory requirements.
We also disclosed a summary of the results of our company-
The capital plan must include a description of all planned
run stress tests on our Investor Relations website and
capital actions over a nine-quarter planning horizon, including
increased our quarterly common stock dividend to $0.85 per
any issuance or redemption of a debt or equity capital
share from $0.775, beginning with the common stock
instrument, any capital distribution (i.e., payments of
dividend announced on July 18, 2023. Additionally, our
dividends or stock repurchases) and any similar action that the
Board of Directors reauthorized a multi-year common stock
Federal Reserve determines could impact our consolidated
repurchase program of up to $20 billion, without a set
57 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
expiration date, beginning in the third quarter of 2023, which on June 30, 2023. For more information about resolution
will be exercised from time to time as conditions warrant. planning requirements, see “Business—Supervision and
Regulation—Financial Holding Company—Resolution and
Attribution of Average Common Equity According to the Recovery Planning.”
Required Capital Framework
As described in our most recent resolution plan, our preferred
Our required capital (“Required Capital”) estimation is based resolution strategy is an SPOE strategy. In line with our
on the Required Capital framework, an internal capital SPOE strategy, the Parent Company has transferred, and has
adequacy measure. Common equity attribution to the business agreed to transfer on an ongoing basis, certain assets to its
segments is based on capital usage calculated under the wholly owned, direct subsidiary Morgan Stanley Holdings
Required Capital framework, as well as each business LLC (the “Funding IHC”). In addition, the Parent Company
segment’s relative contribution to our total Required Capital. has entered into an amended and restated support agreement
with its material entities (including the Funding IHC) and
The Required Capital framework is a risk-based and leverage-
certain other subsidiaries. In the event of a resolution
based capital measure, which is compared with our regulatory
scenario, the Parent Company would be obligated to
capital to ensure that we maintain an amount of going concern
contribute all of its contributable assets to our supported
capital after absorbing potential losses from stress events,
entities and/or the Funding IHC. The Funding IHC would be
where applicable, at a point in time. The amount of capital
obligated to provide capital and liquidity, as applicable, to our
allocated to the business segments is generally set at the
supported entities. The combined implication of the SPOE
beginning of each year and remains fixed throughout the year
resolution strategy and the requirement to maintain certain
until the next annual reset unless a significant business change
levels of TLAC is that losses in resolution would be imposed
occurs (e.g., acquisition or disposition). We define the
on the holders of eligible LTD and other forms of eligible
difference between our total average common equity and the
TLAC issued by the Parent Company before any losses are
sum of the average common equity amounts allocated to our
imposed on creditors of our supported entities and without
business segments as Parent Company common equity. We
requiring taxpayer or government financial support.
generally hold Parent Company common equity for
prospective regulatory requirements, organic growth, The obligations of the Parent Company and the Funding IHC
potential future acquisitions and other capital needs. under the amended and restated support agreement are in
most cases secured on a senior basis by the assets of the
Average Common Equity Attribution under the Required
Parent Company (other than shares in subsidiaries of the
Capital Framework1
Parent Company and certain other assets) and the assets of the
$ in billions 2023 2022 2021 Funding IHC. As a result, claims of our supported entities,
Institutional Securities $ 45.6 $ 48.8 $ 43.5 including the Funding IHC, with respect to the secured assets,
Wealth Management 28.8 31.0 28.6 are effectively senior to unsecured obligations of the Parent
Investment Management2 10.4 10.6 8.8 Company.
Parent 6.0 3.5 16.2
Total $ 90.8 $ 93.9 $ 97.1 For more information about resolution and recovery planning
requirements and our activities in these areas, including the
1. The attribution of average common equity to the business segments is a non-GAAP
financial measure. See “Selected Non-GAAP Financial Information” herein. implications of such activities in a resolution scenario, see
2. The total average common equity and the allocation to the Investment Management
business segment in 2021 reflect the Eaton Vance acquisition on March 1, 2021. “Business—Supervision and Regulation—Financial Holding
Company—Resolution and Recovery Planning” and “Risk
We continue to evaluate our Required Capital framework with
Factors—Legal, Regulatory and Compliance Risk.”
respect to the impact of evolving regulatory requirements, as
appropriate. Regulatory Developments and Other Matters
Resolution and Recovery Planning Replacement of London Interbank Offered Rate and
Replacement or Reform of Other Interest Rate Benchmarks
We are required to submit once every two years to the Federal
Reserve and the FDIC (“Agencies”) a resolution plan that Central banks around the world, including the Federal
describes our strategy for a rapid and orderly resolution under Reserve, have sponsored initiatives in recent years to replace
the U.S. Bankruptcy Code in the event of our material LIBOR and replace or reform certain other interest rate
financial distress or failure. We submitted our 2021 targeted benchmarks (collectively, the “IBORs”).
resolution plan on June 30, 2021. In November 2022, we
received joint feedback on our 2021 resolution plan from the With the cessation of publication of U.S. dollar LIBOR rates
Agencies. The feedback indicated that there are no on a representative basis as of June 30, 2023, all LIBOR
shortcomings or deficiencies in our 2021 resolution plan and publications have ceased on a representative basis. However,
that we had successfully addressed a prior shortcoming the one-, three- and six-month U.S. dollar LIBOR and three-
identified by the Agencies in the review of our 2019 full month sterling LIBOR rates are being published for a limited
resolution plan. We submitted our 2023 full resolution plan period for use in legacy transactions on the basis of a
December 2023 Form 10-K 58Table of Contents
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
synthetic methodology (known as “synthetic LIBOR”). includes operational risk and credit valuation adjustment
Publication of the three-month synthetic sterling LIBOR will RWA components.
cease at the end of March 2024 and publication of the one-,
three- and six-month synthetic U.S. dollar LIBOR will cease The Basel III Endgame Proposal, if adopted as a final rule,
at the end of September 2024. would maintain the current capital rule’s dual-requirement
structure, whereby we and our U.S. Bank Subsidiaries would
As of December 31, 2023, a significant majority of our U.S. be required to calculate our risk-based capital ratios under
dollar LIBOR-referenced contracts contained fallback both the Expanded Approach and the Standardized Approach.
provisions or otherwise had a path that allowed for the In addition, the proposal would modify the Standardized
transition to an alternative reference rate following the Approach by requiring that the new market risk standards
cessation of the applicable U.S. dollar LIBOR rate. We from the proposal also be applied in the Standardized
continue to execute against our Firmwide IBOR transition Approach.
plan to complete the transition in all relevant markets to
alternative reference rates. The Basel III Endgame Proposal would apply the SCB and G-
SIB surcharge to risk-based capital requirements calculated
See also “Risk Factors—Risk Management” for a further under both the Expanded Approach and the Standardized
discussion of risks related to the planned replacement of the Approach. The proposal includes a proposed effective date of
IBORs and/or reform of other interest rate benchmarks and July 1, 2025, with three-year transition arrangements until
related risks. revised standards are fully phased in on July 1, 2028.
FDIC Final Rulemaking on Special Assessment
Based on our current understanding of the Basel III Endgame
Proposal, we estimate that, if the Expanded Approach had
Following the failures of certain banks and resulting losses to
applied on a fully phased-in basis as of December 31, 2023,
the FDIC’s Deposit Insurance Fund in the first half of 2023,
and in the absence of taking any actions to mitigate its impact,
the FDIC adopted a final rule on November 16, 2023 to
our Expanded Approach RWAs as of that date would have
implement a special assessment to recover the cost associated
been approximately 40% higher than our actual Standardized
with protecting uninsured depositors. Under the final rule, the
Approach RWAs as of that date.
assessment base for the special assessment is equal to an IDI’s
estimated uninsured deposits reported as of December 31,
The increase in RWAs resulting from the Expanded Approach
2022, adjusted to exclude the first $5 billion of uninsured
would result, assuming all other surcharge elements remained
deposits. The $5 billion exclusion is applied once to the
unchanged, in a lower SCB and lower G-SIB Method 2
aggregate uninsured deposits of our U.S. Bank Subsidiaries.
surcharge as compared with current surcharges, as RWAs are
The final rule provides that, starting in 2024, the FDIC will
included in the denominators of the relevant calculations for
collect the special assessment at a quarterly rate of 3.36 basis
each buffer. Lower surcharges would, therefore, partially
points over eight quarterly assessment periods, subject to
decrease the otherwise higher regulatory capital requirements
change depending on any adjustments to the loss estimate,
under the Expanded Approach. The proposal would phase in
mergers, failures, or amendments to reported estimates of
the higher Expanded Approach RWAs on July 1 of each year
uninsured deposits. We recorded the cost of the entire special
during the transition, thereby increasing our regulatory capital
assessment of $286 million in Non-interest expenses when the
requirements, with delayed incorporation of the potentially
final rule was published in the Federal Register, in the fourth
lower SCB and G-SIB Method 2 capital surcharge
quarter of 2023.
calculations.
Basel III Endgame Proposal
Any estimate of how the Expanded Approach may impact us
On July 27, 2023, U.S. banking agencies proposed revisions is a forward-looking statement and subject to uncertainty, as
to risk-based capital and related standards applicable to us and actual results may differ from the anticipated results and may
our U.S. Bank Subsidiaries (“Basel III Endgame Proposal”). be materially affected by and dependent on a range of factors,
The proposal would introduce a new measure of RWAs including business performance, future capital actions, the
known as “Expanded Total RWAs” (the “Expanded results of future supervisory stress tests, and potential
Approach”), reflecting new RWA methodologies that modifications to the proposal by the U.S. banking agencies in
generally align with changes to the global Basel Accord a final rulemaking. The Firm does not undertake to update
adopted by the Basel Committee. The proposal would any forward-looking statement.
eliminate the current capital rule’s Advanced Approach and
G-SIB Surcharge Proposal
effectively replace it with the Expanded Approach, which
more heavily relies on standardized methodologies. As
On July 27, 2023, the Federal Reserve proposed revisions to
compared with the Standardized Approach, the Expanded
the G-SIB capital surcharge framework applicable to us (“G-
Approach includes more granular risk weights for credit risk
SIB Surcharge Proposal”). The G-SIB Surcharge Proposal
and introduces a new market risk framework. In addition,
includes various technical revisions to the G-SIB capital
unlike the Standardized Approach, the Expanded Approach
surcharge methodology and would revise the resulting
59 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Method 2 G-SIB capital surcharge from 0.5-percentage point
increments to 0.1-percentage point increments. The G-SIB
Surcharge Proposal includes a proposed effective date two
calendar quarters after the date of adoption of a final rule by
the Federal Reserve. We continue to evaluate the G-SIB
Surcharge Proposal and the potential impacts, if adopted, on
our capital requirements and our Required Capital framework.
December 2023 Form 10-K 60Table of Contents
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Risk
Risk Management management requires thorough and frequent reporting and the
appropriate escalation of risk matters. The fast-paced,
Overview complex and constantly evolving nature of global financial
markets requires us to maintain a risk management culture
Risk is an inherent part of our businesses and activities. We that is incisive, knowledgeable about specialized products and
believe effective risk management is vital to the success of markets, and subject to ongoing review and enhancement.
our business activities. Accordingly, we have an ERM
framework to integrate the diverse roles of risk management Our risk appetite defines the aggregate level and types of risk
into a holistic enterprise structure and to facilitate the that the Firm is willing to accept to achieve its business
incorporation of risk assessment into decision-making objectives, taking into account the interests of clients and
processes across the Firm. fiduciary duties to shareholders, as well as capital and other
regulatory requirements. This risk appetite is embedded in our
We have policies and procedures in place to identify, risk culture and linked to our short-term and long-term
measure, monitor, escalate, mitigate and control the principal strategic, capital and financial plans, as well as compensation
risks involved in the activities of the Institutional Securities, programs. This risk appetite and the related Board-level risk
Wealth Management and Investment Management business limits and risk tolerance statements are reviewed and
segments, as well as at the Parent Company level. The approved by the BRC and the Board on at least an annual
principal risks involved in our business activities are both basis.
financial and non-financial and include market (including
non-trading risks), credit, liquidity, model, operational Risk Governance Structure
(including cybersecurity), compliance (including conduct),
financial crime, strategic and reputational risks. Strategic risk Risk management at the Firm requires independent Firm-level
is integrated into our business planning, embedded in the oversight, accountability of our business divisions, and
evaluation of all principal risks and overseen by the Board. effective communication of risk matters across the Firm, to
senior management and ultimately to the Board. Our risk
The cornerstone of our risk management philosophy is the governance structure is set forth in the following chart and
pursuit of risk-adjusted returns through prudent risk taking also includes risk managers, committees, and groups within
that protects our capital base and franchise. This philosophy is and across business segments and operating legal entities. The
implemented through the ERM framework. Five key ERM framework, composed of independent but
principles underlie this philosophy: integrity, complementary entities, facilitates efficient and
comprehensiveness, independence, accountability and comprehensive supervision of our risk exposures and
transparency. To help ensure the efficacy of risk management, processes.
which is an essential component of our reputation, senior
RRP—Resolution and Recovery Planning
1. Committees include the Capital Commitment Committee, Global Large Loan Committee, Equity Underwriting Committee, Leveraged Finance Underwriting Committee and
Municipal Capital Commitment Committee.
2. Committees include the Securities Risk Committee, Wealth Management Risk Committee and Investment Management Risk Committee.
61 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Risk Disclosures
Morgan Stanley Board of Directors Operations and Technology Committee of the Board
The Board has oversight of the ERM framework and is The BOTC oversees our operations and technology strategy
responsible for helping to ensure that our risks are managed in and significant investments in support of such strategy;
a sound manner. The Board has authorized the committees oversees operational risk, including information technology,
within the ERM framework to help facilitate our risk information security, fraud, third-party oversight, business
oversight responsibilities. As set forth in the Board’s disruption and resilience and cybersecurity risks and the steps
Corporate Governance Policies, the Board also oversees, and management has taken to monitor and control such exposures.
receives reports on, our financial performance, strategy and The BOTC reviews and approves significant operations and
business plans, as well as our practices and procedures technology policies. The BOTC also reviews risk
relating to reputational and franchise risk, and culture, values management and risk assessment guidelines in coordination
and conduct. with the Board and other Board committees, and policies
regarding operational risk. The BOTC reports to the Board on
Risk Committee of the Board a regular basis.
The BRC assists the Board in its oversight of the ERM Firm Risk Committee
framework; oversees significant financial risk exposures of
the Firm, including market, credit, model and liquidity risk, The Board has also authorized the Firm Risk Committee
against established risk measurement methodologies and the (“FRC”), a management committee appointed and co-chaired
steps management has taken to monitor and control such by the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Risk Officer, which
exposures; oversees our risk appetite statement, including risk includes the most senior officers of the Firm from the
tolerance levels and limits; reviews capital, liquidity and business, independent risk functions and control groups, to
funding strategy and planning and related guidelines and help oversee the ERM framework. The FRC’s responsibilities
policies; reviews the contingency funding plan and capital include: oversight of our risk management principles,
planning process; oversees our significant risk governance, procedures, limits and tolerances; the monitoring of capital
risk management and risk assessment guidelines and policies; levels and material market, credit, model, operational,
oversees the performance of the Chief Risk Officer; reviews liquidity, legal, compliance and reputational risk matters, and
reports from our Strategic Transactions Committee, CCAR other risks, as appropriate; and the steps management has
Committee and RRP Committee; reviews significant new taken to monitor and manage such risks. The FRC also
product risk, emerging risks, regulatory matters and climate establishes and communicates risk appetite, including
risk; and reviews reports from the Chief Audit Officer aggregate Firm limits and tolerances, as appropriate. The
regarding the results of reviews and assessments of the risk Governance Process Review Subcommittee of the FRC
management, liquidity and capital functions. The BRC reports oversees governance and process issues on behalf of the FRC.
to the Board on a regular basis and coordinates with the Board The FRC reports to the Board, the BAC, the BOTC and the
and other Board committees with respect to oversight of risk BRC through the Chief Risk Officer, Chief Financial Officer,
management and risk assessment guidelines. Chief Legal Officer and Head of Non-Financial Risk.
Audit Committee of the Board Functional Risk and Control Committees
The BAC oversees the integrity of our financial statements, Functional risk and control committees and other committees
compliance with legal and regulatory requirements, and within the ERM framework facilitate efficient and
system of internal controls; oversees risk management and comprehensive supervision of our risk exposures and
risk assessment guidelines in coordination with the Board and processes.
other Board committees; reviews the major legal, compliance
and financial crime risk exposures of the Firm and the steps Each business segment has a risk committee that is
management has taken to monitor and control such exposures; responsible for helping to ensure that the business segment, as
appoints, compensates, retains, oversees, evaluates and, when applicable, adheres to established limits for market, credit,
appropriate, replaces the independent auditor; oversees the operational and other risks; implements risk measurement,
qualifications, performance and independence of our monitoring, and management policies, procedures, controls
independent auditor and pre-approves audit and permitted and systems that are consistent with the risk framework
non-audit services; oversees the performance of our Chief established by the FRC; and reviews, on a periodic basis, our
Audit Officer; and, after review, recommends to the Board the aggregate risk exposures, risk exception experience, and the
acceptance and inclusion of the annual audited financial efficacy of our risk identification, measurement, monitoring
statements in the Firm’s annual report on Form 10-K. The and management policies and procedures, and related
BAC reports to the Board on a regular basis. controls.
December 2023 Form 10-K 62Table of Contents
Risk Disclosures
Chief Risk Officer management policies and procedures relating to, among other
things, controls over financial reporting and disclosure; each
The Chief Risk Officer, who is independent of business units, business segment’s market, credit and operational risk profile;
reports to the BRC and the Chief Executive Officer. The liquidity risks; model risks; sales practices; reputational, legal
Chief Risk Officer oversees compliance with our risk limits; enforceability, compliance and regulatory risks; and
approves exceptions to our risk limits; independently reviews technological risks. Participation by the senior officers of the
material market, credit, model and liquidity risks; and reviews Firm and business segment control groups helps ensure that
results of risk management processes with the Board, the risk policies and procedures, exceptions to risk limits, new
BRC, the BOTC and the BAC, as appropriate. The Chief Risk products and business ventures, and transactions with risk
Officer also coordinates with the Head of NFR regarding non- elements undergo thorough review.
financial risk, the Chief Financial Officer and the Chief
Executive Officer regarding capital and liquidity management Internal Audit Department
and works with the Compensation, Management
Development and Succession Committee of the Board to help The Internal Audit Department (“IAD”) independently
ensure that the structure and design of incentive compensation identifies and assesses risks facing the Firm and provides
arrangements do not encourage unnecessary and excessive independent, objective and timely assurance to stakeholders
risk taking. about the effectiveness of risk management, governance and
controls over key risks within the Firm’s businesses and
Head of Non-Financial Risk functions. IAD develops and executes a comprehensive risk-
based assurance plan to fulfill its role and purpose, which
The Head of Non-Financial Risk, who is independent of includes assessing compliance with policies, procedures and
business units, reports to the Chief Legal Officer and Chief laws and regulations. IAD may also conduct other activities,
Administrative Officer. The Head of Non-Financial Risk such as retrospective reviews, pre-implementation reviews
oversees the compliance, financial crimes and operational risk and investigations as requested by the BAC, senior
management functions; independently reviews non-financial management or the Firm’s regulators.
risks, including compliance (including conduct), financial
crimes, and operational (including cybersecurity) risks, as IAD executes its activities in accordance with the mandatory
well as material regulatory risks; and reviews results of risk elements of The Institute of Internal Auditors’ International
management processes with the Board, the BAC, the BOTC Professional Practices Framework as well as the Firm’s Code
and the BRC as appropriate. The Head of Non-Financial Risk of Ethics and Business Conduct, regulatory requirements, and
also coordinates with the Chief Risk Officer regarding IAD’s policies, procedures, standards and guidance. The
financial risks. Chief Audit Officer, who reports functionally to the BAC and
administratively to the Firm’s Chief Executive Officer,
Independent Risk Management Functions communicates the results of IAD activities to the BAC on a
quarterly basis and periodically to the BRC and BOTC.
The Financial Risk Management functions (Market Risk,
Credit Risk, Model Risk and Liquidity Risk Management Culture, Values and Conduct of Employees
Departments) and Non-Financial Risk Management functions
(Compliance, Global Financial Crimes, and Operational Risk Employees of the Firm are accountable for conducting
Departments) are independent of our business units and report themselves in accordance with our core values: Put Clients
to the Chief Risk Officer and Head of Non-Financial Risk, First, Do the Right Thing, Lead with Exceptional Ideas,
respectively. These functions assist senior management and Commit to Diversity and Inclusion, and Give Back. We are
the FRC in monitoring and controlling our risk through a committed to reinforcing and confirming adherence to our
number of control processes. Each function maintains its own core values through our governance framework, tone from the
risk governance structure with specified individuals and top, management oversight, risk management and controls,
committees responsible for aspects of managing risk. Further and three lines of defense structure (business, Independent
discussion about the responsibilities of the risk management Risk Management functions such as Financial Risk
functions may be found under “Market Risk,” “Credit Risk,” Management and Non-Financial Risk Management, and
“Operational Risk,” “Model Risk” and “Liquidity Risk” and Internal Audit).
“Legal, Regulatory and Compliance Risk” herein.
The Board is responsible for overseeing the Firm’s practices
Support and Control Groups and procedures relating to culture, values and conduct, as set
forth in the Board’s Corporate Governance Policies. Senior
Our support and control groups include, but are not limited to, management committees oversee the Firmwide culture, values
Legal, the Finance Division, Technology, the Operations and conduct program and report regularly to the Board. A
Division, the Human Capital Management & Global Services fundamental building block of these programs is the Firm’s
Division (“HCMGS”), Firm Strategy and Execution. Our Code of Conduct, which establishes standards for employee
support and control groups coordinate with the business conduct that further reinforce the Firm’s commitment to
segment control groups to review the risk monitoring and risk integrity and ethical conduct. Every new hire and every
63 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Risk Disclosures
employee annually is required to certify to their understanding activities of our Institutional Securities, Wealth Management
of and adherence to the Code of Conduct. The Firm’s Global and Investment Management business segments. These
Conduct Risk Management Policy also sets out a consistent sections and the estimated amounts of our risk exposure
global framework for managing conduct risk (i.e., the risk generated by our statistical analyses are forward-looking
arising from misconduct by employees or contingent workers) statements. However, the analyses used to assess such risks
and conduct risk incidents at the Firm. are not predictions of future events, and actual results may
vary significantly from such analyses due to events in the
The employee annual performance review process includes markets in which we operate and certain other factors
evaluation of employee conduct related to risk management described in the following paragraphs.
practices and the Firm’s expectations. We also have several
mutually reinforcing processes to identify employee conduct Market Risk
that may have an impact on employment status, current-year
compensation and/or prior-year compensation. For example, Market risk refers to the risk that a change in the level of one
the Global Incentive Compensation Discretion Policy sets or more market prices, rates, spreads, indices, volatilities,
forth standards for managers when making annual correlations or other market factors, such as market liquidity,
compensation decisions and specifically provides that will result in losses for a position or portfolio. Generally, we
managers must consider whether their employees effectively incur market risk as a result of trading, investing and client
managed and/or supervised risk control practices during the facilitation activities, principally within the Institutional
performance year. Control function management meets to Securities business segment where the substantial majority of
discuss employees whose conduct is not in line with our our VaR for market risk exposures is generated. In addition,
expectations. These results are incorporated into identified we incur non-trading market risk, principally within the
employees’ performance reviews and compensation and Wealth Management and Investment Management business
promotion decisions. segments. The Wealth Management business segment
primarily incurs non-trading market risk (including interest
The Firm’s clawback and cancellation provisions apply to rate risk) from lending and deposit-taking activities. The
deferred incentive compensation and cover a broad scope of Investment Management business segment primarily incurs
employee conduct, including any act or omission (including non-trading market risk from capital investments in its funds.
with respect to direct supervisory responsibilities) that
constitutes a breach of obligation to the Firm or causes a Market risk also includes non-trading interest rate risk. Non-
restatement of the Firm’s financial results, constitutes a trading interest rate risk in the banking book (amounts
violation of the Firm’s global risk management principles, classified for regulatory capital purposes under the banking
policies and standards, or causes a loss of revenue associated book regime) refers to the exposure that a change in interest
with a position on which the employee was paid and the rates will result in prospective earnings changes for assets and
employee operated outside of risk management policies. liabilities in the banking book.
Risk Limits Framework Sound market risk management is an integral part of our
culture. The various business units and trading desks are
Risk limits and quantitative metrics provide the basis for responsible for ensuring that market risk exposures are well-
monitoring risk-taking activity and avoiding outsized risk managed and prudent. The control groups help ensure that
taking. Our risk-taking capacity is sized through the Firm’s these risks are measured and closely monitored and are made
capital planning process where losses are estimated under the transparent to senior management. The Market Risk
Firm’s BHC Severely Adverse stress testing scenario. We Department is responsible for ensuring the transparency of
also maintain a comprehensive suite of risk limits and material market risks, monitoring compliance with established
quantitative metrics to support and implement our risk- limits and escalating risk concentrations to appropriate senior
appetite statement. Our risk limits support linkages between management.
the overall risk appetite, which is reviewed by the Board, and
more granular risk-taking decisions and activities. To execute these responsibilities, the Market Risk Department
monitors our risk against limits on aggregate risk exposures,
Risk limits, once established, are reviewed and updated on at performs a variety of risk analyses, routinely reports risk
least an annual basis, with more frequent updates as summaries, and maintains our VaR and scenario analysis
necessary. Board-level risk limits address the most important systems. Market risk is also monitored through various
Firmwide aggregations of risk. Additional risk limits measures: by use of statistics (including VaR and related
approved by the FRC address more specific types of risk and analytical measures), by measures of position size and
are bound by the higher-level Board risk limits. sensitivity, and through routine stress testing, which measures
the impact on the value of existing portfolios of specified
Risk Management Process
changes in market factors and scenarios designed by the
Market Risk Department in collaboration with the business
In subsequent sections, we discuss our risk management
units. The material risks identified by these processes are
policies and procedures for our primary risks involved in the
summarized in reports produced by the Market Risk
December 2023 Form 10-K 64Table of Contents
Risk Disclosures
Department that are circulated to and discussed with senior terms, specific characteristics or other basis risks that may
management, the FRC, the BRC and the Board. exist between the hedge instrument and the risk exposure that
is being hedged.
Trading Risks
We manage the market risk associated with our trading
Primary Market Risk Exposures and Market Risk activities on a Firmwide basis, on a worldwide trading
Management division level and on an individual product basis. We manage
and monitor our market risk exposures in such a way as to
We have exposures to a wide range of risks related to interest
maintain a portfolio that we believe is well diversified in the
rates and credit spreads, equity prices, foreign exchange rates
aggregate with respect to market risk factors and that reflects
and commodity prices as well as the associated implied
our aggregate risk tolerance as established by our senior
volatilities, correlations and spreads of the global markets in
management.
which we conduct our trading activities.
Aggregate market risk limits have been approved for the Firm
We are exposed to interest rate and credit spread risk as a
across all divisions worldwide. Additional market risk limits
result of our market-making activities and other trading in
are assigned to trading desks and, as appropriate, products and
interest rate-sensitive financial instruments (i.e., risk arising
regions. Trading division risk managers, desk risk managers,
from changes in the level or implied volatility of interest
traders and the Market Risk Department monitor market risk
rates, the timing of mortgage prepayments, the shape of the
measures against limits in accordance with policies set by our
yield curve and/or credit spreads). The activities from which
senior management.
those exposures arise and the markets in which we are active
include, but are not limited to, the following: derivatives, Value-at-Risk
corporate and government debt across both developed and
emerging markets and asset-backed debt, including mortgage- The statistical technique known as VaR is one of the tools we
related securities. use to measure, monitor and review the market risk exposures
of our trading portfolios. The Market Risk Department
We are exposed to equity price, correlation and implied calculates and distributes daily VaR-based risk measures to
volatility risk as a result of making markets in equity various levels of management.
securities and derivatives and maintaining other positions,
including positions in non-public entities. Positions in non- We estimate VaR using a model based on a one-year equal-
public entities may include, but are not limited to, exposures weighted historical simulation for general market risk factors
to private equity, venture capital, private partnerships, real and name-specific risk in corporate equities and related
estate funds and other funds. Such positions are less liquid, derivatives, and Monte Carlo simulation for name-specific
have longer investment horizons and are more difficult to risk in bonds, loans and related derivatives. The model
hedge than listed equities. constructs a distribution of hypothetical daily changes in the
value of trading portfolios based on historical observation of
We are exposed to foreign exchange rate, correlation and daily changes in key market indices or other market risk
implied volatility risk as a result of making markets in foreign factors, and information on the sensitivity of the portfolio
currencies and foreign currency derivatives, from maintaining values to these market risk factor changes.
foreign exchange positions and from holding non-U.S. dollar-
denominated financial instruments. VaR for risk management purposes (“Management VaR”) is
computed at a 95% level of confidence over a one-day time
We are exposed to commodity price and implied volatility horizon, which is a useful indicator of possible trading losses
risk as a result of market-making activities in commodity resulting from adverse daily market moves. The 95%/one-day
products related primarily to electricity, natural gas, oil and VaR corresponds to the unrealized loss in portfolio value that,
precious metals. Commodity exposures are subject to periods based on historically observed market risk factor movements,
of high price volatility as a result of changes in supply and would have been exceeded with a frequency of 5%, or five
demand. These changes can be caused by weather conditions, times in every 100 trading days, if the portfolio were held
physical production and transportation, or geopolitical and constant for one day.
other events that affect the available supply and level of
demand for these commodities. Our VaR model generally takes into account linear and non-
linear exposures to equity and commodity price risk, interest
We manage our trading positions by employing a variety of rate risk, credit spread risk and foreign exchange rates. The
risk-mitigation strategies. These strategies include model also takes into account linear exposures to implied
diversification of risk exposures and hedging. Hedging volatility risks for all asset classes and non-linear exposures to
activities consist of the purchase or sale of positions in related implied volatility risks for equity, commodity and foreign
securities and financial instruments, including a variety of exchange referenced products. The VaR model also captures
derivative products (e.g., futures, forwards, swaps and certain implied correlation risks associated with portfolio
options). Hedging activities may not always provide effective credit derivatives, as well as certain basis risks (e.g., corporate
mitigation against trading losses due to differences in the debt and related credit derivatives).
65 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Risk Disclosures
We use VaR as one of a range of risk management tools. history is updated and the confidence level. As a result, VaR
Among their benefits, VaR models permit estimation of a statistics are more useful when interpreted as indicators of
portfolio’s aggregate market risk exposure, incorporating a trends in a firm’s risk profile rather than as an absolute
range of varied market risks and portfolio assets. One key measure of risk to be compared across firms.
element of the VaR model is that it reflects risk reduction due
to portfolio diversification or hedging activities. However, Our regulators have approved the same VaR model we use for
VaR has various limitations, which include, but are not risk management purposes for use in regulatory calculations.
limited to: use of historical changes in market risk factors,
The portfolio of positions used for Management VaR differs
which may not be accurate predictors of future market
from that used for Regulatory VaR. Management VaR
conditions and may not fully incorporate the risk of extreme
contains certain positions that are excluded from Regulatory
market events that are outsized relative to observed historical
VaR.
market behavior or reflect the historical distribution of results
beyond the 95% confidence interval; and reporting of losses
95%/One-Day Management VaR
in a single day, which does not reflect the risk of positions
that cannot be liquidated or hedged in one day. A small 2023
proportion of market risk generated by trading positions is not Period
$ in millions End Average High1 Low1
included in VaR.
Interest rate and credit spread $ 29 $ 34 $ 43 $ 27
Equity price 19 24 38 15
The modeling of the risk characteristics of some positions
Foreign exchange rate 6 9 18 5
relies on approximations that, under certain circumstances,
Commodity price 11 17 35 10
could produce significantly different results from those
Less: Diversification benefit2 (27) (40) N/A N/A
produced using more precise measures. VaR is most
Primary Risk Categories $ 38 $ 44 $ 60 $ 33
appropriate as a risk measure for trading positions in liquid
Credit Portfolio 25 21 25 18
financial markets and will understate the risk associated with Less: Diversification benefit2 (22) (15) N/A N/A
severe events, such as periods of extreme illiquidity. We are Total Management VaR $ 41 $ 50 $ 72 $ 41
aware of these and other limitations and, therefore, use VaR
2022
as only one component in our risk management oversight
Period
process. This process also incorporates stress testing and $ in millions End Average High1 Low1
scenario analyses and extensive risk monitoring, analysis and Interest rate and credit spread $ 37 $ 31 $ 43 $ 21
control at the trading desk, division and Firm levels. Equity price 16 23 41 16
Foreign exchange rate 10 8 19 3
We update our VaR model in response to changes in the Commodity price 26 27 41 15
composition of trading portfolios and to improvements in Less: Diversification benefit2 (36) (40) N/A N/A
modeling techniques and systems capabilities. We are Primary Risk Categories $ 53 $ 49 $ 65 $ 31
committed to continuous review and enhancement of VaR Credit Portfolio 19 15 19 12
Less: Diversification benefit2 (9) (11) N/A N/A
methodologies and assumptions in order to capture evolving
Total Management VaR $ 63 $ 53 $ 74 $ 32
risks associated with changes in market structure and
dynamics. As part of our regular process improvements, 1. The high and low VaR values for the Total Management VaR and each of the
component VaRs might have occurred on different days during the quarter, and,
additional systematic and name-specific risk factors may be
therefore, the diversification benefit is not an applicable measure.
added to improve the VaR model’s ability to more accurately 2. Diversification benefit equals the difference between the total VaR and the sum of
the component VaRs. This benefit arises because the simulated one-day losses for
estimate risks to specific asset classes or industry sectors. each of the components occur on different days; similar diversification benefits also
are taken into account within each component.
Since the reported VaR statistics are estimates based on
Average Total Management VaR and Average Management
historical data, VaR should not be viewed as predictive of our
VaR for the Primary Risk Categories decreased in 2023 from
future revenues or financial performance or of our ability to
2022 primarily due to reduced exposure in the Commodity
monitor and manage risk. There can be no assurance that our
price risk category and lower market volatility.
actual losses on a particular day will not exceed the VaR
amounts indicated in the following tables or that such losses
Distribution of VaR Statistics and Net Revenues
will not occur more than five times in 100 trading days for a
95%/one-day VaR. VaR does not predict the magnitude of We evaluate the reasonableness of our VaR model by
losses that, should they occur, may be significantly greater comparing the potential declines in portfolio values generated
than the VaR amount. by the model with corresponding actual trading results for the
Firm, as well as individual business units. For days where
VaR statistics are not readily comparable across firms because
losses exceed the VaR statistic, we examine the drivers of
of differences in the firms’ portfolios, modeling assumptions
trading losses to evaluate the VaR model’s accuracy. There
and methodologies. These differences can result in materially
were 16 trading loss days in 2023, one of which exceeded
different VaR estimates across firms for similar portfolios.
95% Total Management VaR, compared to 15 trading loss
The impact of such differences varies depending on the factor
days in 2022, none of which exceeded 95% Total
history assumptions, the frequency with which the factor
Management VaR.
December 2023 Form 10-K 66Daily 95%/One-Day Total Management VaR for 2023
($ in millions)
syaD
fo
rebmuN
94
86
46
21
8
3 1
54$
ot
04$
05$
ot
54$
55$
ot
05$
06$
ot
55$
56$
ot
06$
07$
ot
56$
57$
ot
07$
Daily Net Trading Revenues for 2023
($ in millions)
syaD
fo
rebmuN
96
59 58
23
13
5
1 0 2 2
)57($
ot
)001($
)05($
ot
)57($
)52($
ot
)05($
0$
ot
)52($
52$
ot
0$
05$
ot
52$
57$
ot
05$
001$
ot
57$
521$
ot
001$
051$
ot
521$
Table of Contents
Risk Disclosures
Credit Spread Risk Sensitivity1
At At
December 31, December 31,
$ in millions 2023 2022
Derivatives $ 6 $ 7
Borrowings carried at fair value 48 39
1. Amounts represent the potential gain for each 1 bps widening of our credit spread.
Credit spread risk sensitivity for borrowings carried at fair
value at December 31, 2023 increased from December 31,
2022, primarily driven by debt issuances and credit spread
tightening.
The Wealth Management business segment reflects a
substantial portion of our non-trading interest rate risk. Net
interest income in the Wealth Management business segment
primarily consists of interest income earned on non-trading
assets held, including loans and investment securities, as well
as margin and other lending on non-bank entities and interest
expense incurred on non-trading liabilities, primarily deposits.
Wealth Management Net Interest Income Sensitivity Analysis
At At
December 31, December 31,
$ in millions 2023 2022
Basis point change
+100 $ 585 $ 643
-100 (609) (745)
The previous table presents an analysis of selected
instantaneous upward and downward parallel interest rate
shocks (subject to a floor of zero percent in the downward
scenario) on net interest income over the next 12 months for
our Wealth Management business segment. These shocks are
applied to our 12-month forecast for our Wealth Management
business segment, which incorporates market expectations of
interest rates and our forecasted business activity, including
deposit forecasts as a key assumption.
We do not manage to any single rate scenario but rather
manage net interest income in our Wealth Management
Daily net trading revenues include profits and losses from business segment across a range of possible outcomes,
Interest rate and credit spread, Equity price, Foreign exchange including non-parallel rate change scenarios. The sensitivity
rate, Commodity price, and Credit Portfolio positions and analysis assumes that we take no action in response to these
intraday trading activities for our trading businesses. Certain scenarios, assumes there are no changes in other
items such as fees, commissions, net interest income and macroeconomic variables normally correlated with changes in
counterparty default risk are excluded from daily net trading interest rates and includes subjective assumptions regarding
revenues and the VaR model. Revenues required for customer and market re-pricing behavior and other factors.
Regulatory VaR backtesting further exclude intraday trading.
Our Wealth Management business segment balance sheet is
Non-Trading Risks asset sensitive, given assets reprice faster than liabilities,
resulting in higher net interest income in increasing interest
We believe that sensitivity analysis is an appropriate rate scenarios. The level of interest rates may impact the
representation of our non-trading risks. The following amount of deposits held at the Firm, given competition for
sensitivity analyses cover substantially all of the non-trading deposits from other institutions and alternative cash-
risk in our portfolio. equivalent products available to depositors. Further, rising
interest rates could also impact client demand for loans. Net
interest income sensitivity to interest rates at December 31,
2023 decreased from December 31, 2022, primarily driven by
the effects of changes in the mix of our assets and liabilities.
67 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Risk Disclosures
Investments Sensitivity, Including Related Carried Interest • providing short- or long-term funding that is secured by
physical or financial collateral, including, but not limited to,
Loss from 10% Decline
real estate and marketable securities, whose value may at
At At
December 31, December 31, times be insufficient to fully cover the repayment amount;
$ in millions 2023 2022
• posting margin and/or collateral to clearinghouses, clearing
Investments related to Investment
Management activities $ 481 $ 431 agencies, exchanges, banks, securities firms and other
Other investments: financial counterparties;
MUMSS 134 143 • placing funds on deposit at other financial institutions to
Other Firm investments 399 378 support our clearing and settlement obligations; and
• investing or trading in securities and loan pools, whereby
We have exposure to public and private companies through the value of these assets may fluctuate based on realized or
direct investments, as well as through funds that invest in expected defaults on the underlying obligations or loans.
these assets. These investments are predominantly equity
positions with long investment horizons, a portion of which is We incur credit risk in our Wealth Management business
for business facilitation purposes. The market risk related to segment, primarily through lending to individuals and entities,
these investments is measured by estimating the potential including, but not limited to, the following:
reduction in net revenues associated with a reasonably
possible 10% decline in investment values and related impact • margin loans collateralized by securities;
on performance-based income, as applicable. • securities-based lending and other forms of secured loans,
including tailored lending to ultra-high net worth clients,
Asset Management Revenue Sensitivity that are in most cases secured by various types of collateral,
including marketable securities, private investments,
Certain asset management revenues in the Wealth commercial real estate and other financial assets;
Management and Investment Management business segments • single-family residential mortgage loans in conforming,
are derived from management fees, which are based on fee- non-conforming or HELOC form, primarily to existing
based client assets in Wealth Management or AUM in Wealth Management clients; and
Investment Management (together, “client holdings”). The • employee loans granted primarily to recruit certain Wealth
assets underlying client holdings are primarily composed of Management representatives.
equity, fixed income and alternative investments and are
sensitive to changes in related markets. These revenues Monitoring and Control
depend on multiple factors including, but not limited to, the
level and duration of a market increase or decline, price The Credit Risk Management Department (“CRM”)
volatility, the geographic and industry mix of client assets, establishes Firmwide practices to evaluate, monitor and
and client behavior such as the rate and magnitude of client control credit risk at the transaction, obligor and portfolio
investments and redemptions. Therefore, overall revenues levels. The CRM approves extensions of credit, evaluates the
may not correlate completely with changes in the related creditworthiness of the counterparties and borrowers on a
markets. regular basis, and helps ensure that credit exposure is actively
monitored and managed. The evaluation of counterparties and
Credit Risk borrowers includes an assessment of the probability that an
obligor will default on its financial obligations and any losses
Credit risk refers to the risk of loss arising when a borrower, that may occur when an obligor defaults. In addition, credit
counterparty or issuer does not meet its financial obligations risk exposure is actively managed by credit professionals and
to us. We are primarily exposed to credit risk from institutions committees within the CRM and through various risk
and individuals through our Institutional Securities and committees, whose membership includes individuals from the
Wealth Management business segments. CRM. A comprehensive and global Credit Limits Framework
is utilized to manage credit risk levels across the Firm. The
We incur credit risk in our Institutional Securities business Credit Limits Framework is calibrated within our risk
segment through a variety of activities, including, but not tolerance and includes single-name limits and portfolio
limited to, the following: concentration limits by country, industry and product type.
• extending credit to clients through loans and lending The CRM helps ensure timely and transparent communication
commitments; of material credit risks, compliance with established limits
• entering into swap or other derivative contracts under and escalation of risk concentrations to appropriate senior
which counterparties may have obligations to make management. The CRM also works closely with the Market
payments to us; Risk Department and applicable business units to monitor risk
• acting as clearing broker for listed and over-the-counter exposures and to perform stress tests to identify, analyze and
derivatives whereby we guarantee client performance to control credit risk concentrations arising from lending and
clearinghouses;
trading activities. The stress tests shock market factors (e.g.,
interest rates, commodity prices, credit spreads), risk
December 2023 Form 10-K 68Table of Contents
Risk Disclosures
parameters (e.g., probability of default and loss given default), forwards, swaps and options). Additionally, we may sell,
recovery rates and expected losses in order to assess the assign or syndicate loans and lending commitments to other
impact of stresses on exposures, profit and loss, and our financial institutions in the primary and secondary loan
capital position. Stress tests are conducted in accordance with markets.
our established policies and procedures. In connection with our derivatives trading activities, we
generally enter into master netting agreements and collateral
Credit Evaluation
arrangements with counterparties. These agreements provide
The evaluation of corporate and institutional counterparties us with the ability to demand collateral, as well as to liquidate
and borrowers includes assigning credit ratings, which reflect collateral and offset receivables and payables covered under
an assessment of an obligor’s probability of default and loss the same master agreement in the event of a counterparty
given default. Credit evaluations typically involve the default. A collateral management group monitors collateral
assessment of financial statements; leverage; liquidity; capital levels against requirements and oversees the administration of
strength; asset composition and quality; market capitalization; the collateral function. See Note 8 to the financial statements
access to capital markets; adequacy of collateral, if for additional information about our collateralized
applicable; and, in the case of certain loans, cash flow transactions.
projections and debt service requirements. The CRM also
Loans and Lending Commitments
evaluates strategy, market position, industry dynamics,
management and other factors such as country risks and legal At December 31, 2023
and contingent risks that could affect the obligor’s risk $ in millions HFI HFS FVO1 Total
Institutional Securities:
profile. Additionally, the CRM evaluates the relative position
Corporate $ 6,758 $ 11,862 $ — $ 18,620
of our exposure in the borrower’s capital structure and
Secured lending facilities 39,498 3,161 — 42,659
relative recovery prospects, as well as other structural
Commercial and Residential
8,678 209 3,331 12,218
elements of the particular transaction. The underwriting of real estate
commercial real estate loans includes, but is not limited to, Securities-based lending and 2,818 — 4,402 7,220
Other
review of the property type, LTV ratio, occupancy levels, debt
Total Institutional Securities 57,752 15,232 7,733 80,717
service ratio, prevailing capitalization rates and market
Wealth Management:
dynamics. Residential real estate 60,375 22 — 60,397
Securities-based lending and
The evaluation of consumer borrowers is tailored to the Other 86,423 1 — 86,424
specific type of lending. Securities-based loans are evaluated Total Wealth Management 146,798 23 — 146,821
based on factors that include, but are not limited to, the Total Investment Management2 4 — 455 459
amount of the loan and the amount, quality, diversification, Total loans 204,554 15,255 8,188 227,997
price volatility and liquidity of the collateral. The ACL (1,169) (1,169)
underwriting of residential real estate loans includes, but is Total loans, net of ACL $ 203,385 $ 15,255 $ 8,188 $ 226,828
not limited to, review of the obligor’s debt-to-income ratio, Lending commitments3 $ 149,973
net worth, liquidity, collateral, LTV ratio and industry Total exposure $ 376,801
standard credit-scoring models (e.g., FICO scores). At December 31, 2022
Subsequent credit monitoring for individual loans is $ in millions HFI HFS FVO1 Total
performed at the portfolio level, and collateral values are Institutional Securities:
monitored on an ongoing basis. Corporate $ 6,589 $ 10,634 $ — $ 17,223
Secured lending facilities 35,606 3,176 6 38,788
Credit risk metrics assigned to our borrowers during the Commercial and Residential real
8,515 926 2,548 11,989
evaluation process are incorporated into the CRM estate
Securities-based lending and
maintenance of the allowance for credit losses. Such 2,865 39 5,625 8,529
Other
allowance serves as a reserve for expected inherent losses, as Total Institutional Securities 53,575 14,775 8,179 76,529
well as expected losses related to loans identified as impaired. Wealth Management:
For more information on the allowance for credit losses, see Residential real estate 54,460 4 — 54,464
Notes 2 and 9 to the financial statements. Securities-based lending and 91,797 9 — 91,806
Other
Total Wealth Management 146,257 13 — 146,270
Risk Mitigation
Total Investment Management2 4 — 218 222
We may seek to mitigate credit risk from our lending and Total loans 199,836 14,788 8,397 223,021
trading activities in multiple ways, including collateral ACL (839) (839)
provisions, guarantees and hedges. At the transaction level, Total loans, net of ACL $ 198,997 $ 14,788 $ 8,397 $ 222,182
Lending commitments3 $ 136,960
we seek to mitigate risk through management of key risk
Total exposure $ 359,142
elements such as size, tenor, financial covenants, seniority
Total exposure—consists of Total loans, net of ACL, and Lending commitments
and collateral. We actively hedge our lending and derivatives
1. FVO includes the fair value of certain unfunded lending commitments.
exposures. Hedging activities consist of the purchase or sale 2. Investment Management business segment loans are related to certain of our
activities as an investment adviser and manager. Loans held at fair value are the
of positions in related securities and financial instruments,
result of the consolidation of investment vehicles (including CLOs) managed by
including a variety of derivative products (e.g., futures,
69 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Risk Disclosures
Investment Management, composed primarily of senior secured loans to deteriorating conditions in the commercial real estate sector,
corporations.
including provisions for certain specific loans, mainly in the
3. Lending commitments represent the notional amount of legally binding obligations
to provide funding to clients for lending transactions. Since commitments office portfolio, and modest growth in certain other loan
associated with these business activities may expire unused or may not be utilized
portfolios. Charge-offs in 2023 were primarily related to
to full capacity, they do not necessarily reflect the actual future cash funding
requirements. Commercial real estate and Corporate loans.
We provide loans and lending commitments to a variety of
The base scenario used in our ACL models as of December
customers, including large corporate and institutional clients,
31, 2023 was generated using a combination of consensus
as well as high to ultra-high net worth individuals. In
economic forecasts, forward rates, and internally developed
addition, we purchase loans in the secondary market. Loans
and validated models, and assumes slow economic growth in
and lending commitments are either held for investment, held
2024, followed by a gradual improvement in 2025. Given the
for sale or carried at fair value. For more information on these
nature of our lending portfolio, the most sensitive model input
loan classifications, see Note 2 to the financial statements.
is U.S. gross domestic product (“GDP”).
In 2023, total loans and lending commitments increased by
Forecasted U.S. Real GDP Growth Rates in Base Scenario
approximately $18 billion, primarily due to an increase in
Corporate lending and Secured lending facilities within the 4Q 2024 4Q 2025
Institutional Securities business segment. Year-over-year growth rate 0.9 % 2.0 %
See Notes 4, 5, 9 and 14 to the financial statements for further See Note 2 to the financial statements for a discussion of the
information. Firm’s ACL methodology under CECL.
Allowance for Credit Losses—Loans and Lending Status of Loans Held for Investment
Commitments
At December 31, 2023 At December 31, 2022
$ in millions 2023 IS WM IS WM
ACL—Loans Accrual 98.9 % 99.8 % 99.3 % 99.9 %
Beginning balance $ 839 Nonaccrual1 1.1 % 0.2 % 0.7 % 0.1 %
Gross charge-offs (167)
1. Nonaccrual loans are loans where principal or interest is not expected when
Recoveries 2
contractually due or are past due 90 days or more.
Net (charge-offs) recoveries (165)
Provision for credit losses 488 Net Charge-off Ratios for Loans Held for Investment
Other 7 Secured Residential SBL
Lending Real and
Ending balance $ 1,169 $ in millions Corporate Facilities CRE Estate Other Total
ACL—Lending commitments 2023
Beginning balance $ 504 Net charge-off
Provision for credit losses 44 ratio1 0.47 % — % 1.50 % — % — % 0.08 %
Other 3 Average loans $ 7,062 $ 37,702 $ 8,590 $ 57,177 $ 91,126 $ 201,657
Ending balance $ 551 2022
Total ending balance $ 1,720 Net charge-off
ratio1 (0.09) % 0.01 % 0.09 % — % 0.02 % 0.01 %
Average loans $ 6,544 $ 33,172 $ 8,234 $ 49,937 $ 93,427 $ 191,314
Provision for Credit Losses by Business Segment
2021
Net charge-off
Year Ended December 31, 2023 ratio1 0.44 % 0.24 % 0.38 % — % 0.01 % 0.08 %
$ in millions IS WM Total
Average loans $ 5,184 $ 27,833 $ 7,089 $ 39,111 $ 75,230 $ 154,447
Loans $ 356 $ 132 $ 488
CRE—Commercial real estate
Lending commitments 45 (1) 44 SBL—Securities-based lending
Total $ 401 $ 131 $ 532 1. Net charge-off ratio represents gross charge-offs net of recoveries divided by total
average loans held for investment before ACL.
Credit exposure arising from our loans and lending
commitments is measured in accordance with our internal risk
management standards. Risk factors considered in
determining the allowance for credit losses for loans and
lending commitments include the borrower’s financial
strength, industry, facility structure, LTV ratio, debt service
ratio, collateral and covenants. Qualitative and environmental
factors such as economic and business conditions, nature and
volume of the portfolio and lending terms, and volume and
severity of past due loans may also be considered.
The allowance for credit losses for loans and lending
commitments increased in 2023, primarily related to
December 2023 Form 10-K 70Table of Contents
Risk Disclosures
Institutional Securities Loans and Lending Commitments1 Institutional Securities Loans and Lending Commitments by
Industry
At December 31, 2023
Contractual Years to Maturity At At
December 31, December 31,
$ in millions < 1 1-5 5-15 >15 Total $ in millions 2023 2022
Loans
Financials $ 57,804 $ 54,222
AA $ 3 $ 11 $ 216 $ — $ 230
Real estate 35,342 32,358
A 1,054 950 182 — 2,186
Industrials 18,056 14,557
BBB 7,117 10,076 346 — 17,539
Communications services 15,301 15,336
BB 11,723 16,367 1,775 277 30,142
Healthcare 14,274 12,353
Other NIG 9,586 12,961 2,924 156 25,627
Information technology 12,430 13,790
Unrated2 111 1,036 62 2,910 4,119
Consumer discretionary 12,190 11,592
Total loans, net of ACL 29,594 41,401 5,505 3,343 79,843
Utilities 11,522 10,542
Lending commitments
Consumer staples 9,305 7,823
AAA — 50 — — 50
Energy 9,156 9,115
AA 2,610 3,064 154 — 5,828
Materials 6,503 6,102
A 7,704 21,256 593 — 29,553
Insurance 6,486 5,925
BBB 9,161 46,304 106 — 55,571
Other 1,835 1,831
BB 4,069 16,431 1,594 414 22,508
Total exposure $ 210,204 $ 195,546
Other NIG 1,916 13,842 1,077 3 16,838
Unrated2 6 7 — — 13
Institutional Securities Lending Activities
Total lending
commitments 25,466 100,954 3,524 417 130,361
Total exposure $ 55,060 $ 142,355 $ 9,029 $ 3,760 $ 210,204 The Institutional Securities business segment lending
activities include Corporate, Secured lending facilities,
At December 31, 2022
Commercial and Residential real estate, and Securities-based
Contractual Years to Maturity
lending and Other. As of December 31, 2023 and December
$ in millions < 1 1-5 5-15 >15 Total
31, 2022, over 90% of our total lending exposure, which
Loans
consists of loans and lending commitments, is investment
AA $ 66 $ — $ 139 $ — $ 205
A 1,331 787 185 — 2,303 grade and/or secured by collateral.
BBB 5,632 10,712 465 — 16,809
Corporate comprises relationship and event-driven loans and
BB 11,045 19,219 796 162 31,222
Other NIG 7,274 10,249 3,945 139 21,607 lending commitments supporting general and event-driven
Unrated2 95 924 624 2,066 3,709 financing needs for our institutional clients, which typically
Total loans, net of ACL 25,443 41,891 6,154 2,367 75,855 consist of revolving lines of credit, term loans and bridge
Lending commitments loans; may have varying terms; may be senior or
AAA — 50 — — 50 subordinated; may be secured or unsecured; are generally
AA 2,515 2,935 11 — 5,461 contingent upon representations, warranties and contractual
A 5,030 19,717 202 330 25,279 conditions applicable to the borrower; and may be syndicated,
BBB 10,263 39,615 566 — 50,444 traded or hedged. Relationship loans and lending
BB 3,691 17,656 1,416 96 22,859 commitments are extended to select institutional clients,
Other NIG 1,173 13,872 530 — 15,575
primarily for general corporate purposes and generally with
Unrated2 — 20 — 3 23
the intent to hold for the foreseeable future. Event-driven
Total lending
commitments 22,672 93,865 2,725 429 119,691 loans and lending commitments are extended in connection
Total exposure $ 48,115 $ 135,756 $ 8,879 $ 2,796 $ 195,546 with specific client transactions and are explained in further
detail in “Institutional Securities Event-Driven Loans and
NIG–Non-investment grade
1. Counterparty credit ratings are internally determined by the CRM. Lending Commitments” herein.
2. Unrated loans and lending commitments are primarily trading positions that are
measured at fair value and risk-managed as a component of market risk. For a
further discussion of our market risk, see “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures Secured lending facilities include loans provided to clients,
about Risk—Market Risk” herein. which are collateralized by various assets, including
residential and commercial real estate mortgage loans,
investor commitments for capital calls, corporate loans and
other assets. These facilities generally provide for
overcollateralization. Credit risk with respect to these loans
and lending commitments arises from the failure of a
borrower to perform according to the terms of the loan
agreement and/or a decline in the underlying collateral value.
The Firm monitors collateral levels against the requirements
of lending agreements. See Note 15 to the financial statements
for information about our securitization activities.
71 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Risk Disclosures
Commercial real estate loans are primarily senior, secured by Institutional Securities Commercial Real Estate Loans and
underlying real estate and are typically in term loan form. In Lending Commitments
addition, as part of certain of its trading and securitization
By Region
activities, Institutional Securities may also hold residential
At December 31, 2023 At December 31, 2022
real estate loans.
$ in millions Loans1 LC1 Total Loans1 LC1 Total
Americas $ 5,410 $ 289 $ 5,699 $ 6,320 $ 378 $ 6,698
Securities-based lending and Other includes financing
EMEA 3,127 56 3,183 3,040 79 3,119
extended to sales and trading customers and corporate loans
Asia 485 — 485 445 5 450
purchased in the secondary market. Total $ 9,022 $ 345 $ 9,367 $ 9,805 $ 462 $ 10,267
Institutional Securities Event-Driven Loans and Lending By Property Type
Commitments
At December 31, 2023 At December 31, 2022
At December 31, 2023 $ in millions Loans1 LC1 Total Loans1 LC1 Total
Contractual Years to Maturity Office $ 3,310 $ 186 $ 3,496 $ 3,861 $ 301 $ 4,162
$ in millions <1 1-5 5-15 Total Industrial 2,435 5 2,440 2,561 25 2,586
Loans, net of ACL $ 1,974 $ 2,564 $ 2,580 $ 7,118 Multifamily 1,715 74 1,789 1,889 85 1,974
Lending commitments 3,564 685 549 4,798 Retail 842 7 849 659 6 665
Total exposure $ 5,538 $ 3,249 $ 3,129 $ 11,916 Hotel 718 73 791 780 45 825
At December 31, 2022 Other 2 — 2 55 — 55
Contractual Years to Maturity Total $ 9,022 $ 345 $ 9,367 $ 9,805 $ 462 $ 10,267
$ in millions <1 1-5 5-15 Total LC–Lending Commitments
Loans, net of ACL $ 2,385 $ 1,441 $ 2,771 $ 6,597 1. Amounts include HFI, HFS and FVO loans and lending commitments. HFI loans are
presented net of ACL.
Lending commitments 3,079 861 603 4,543
Total exposure $ 5,464 $ 2,302 $ 3,374 $ 11,140 The current economic environment and changes in business
and consumer behavior have adversely impacted commercial
Event-driven loans and lending commitments are associated real estate borrowers due to pressure from higher interest
with certain underwritings and/or syndications to finance a rates, tenant lease renewals, and elevated refinancing risks for
specific transaction, such as merger, acquisition, loans with near-term maturities, among other issues. While
recapitalization or project finance activities. Balances may we continue to actively monitor all our loan portfolios, the
fluctuate as such lending is related to transactions that vary in commercial real estate sector remains under heightened focus
timing and size from period to period. given the sector’s sensitivity to economic and secular factors,
credit conditions, and difficulties specific to certain property
Institutional Securities Loans and Lending Commitments
types, most notably office.
Held for Investment
At December 31, 2023 As of December 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, our
Lending
lending against commercial real estate (“CRE”) properties
$ in millions Loans Commitments Total
Corporate $ 6,758 $ 91,752 $ 98,510 totaled $9.4 billion and $10.3 billion within the Institutional
Secured lending facilities 39,498 15,589 55,087 Securities business segment, which represents 4.5% and 5.3%
Commercial real estate 8,678 266 8,944 of total exposure reflected in the Institutional Securities Loans
Other 2,818 915 3,733 and Lending Commitments table above. Those CRE loans are
Total, before ACL $ 57,752 $ 108,522 $ 166,274 originated for experienced sponsors and are generally secured
ACL $ (874) $ (533) $ (1,407) by specific institutional CRE properties. In many cases, loans
are subsequently syndicated or securitized on a full or partial
At December 31, 2022
Lending basis, reducing our ongoing exposure.
$ in millions Loans Commitments Total
Corporate $ 6,589 $ 79,882 $ 86,471 In addition to the amounts included in the table above, we
Secured lending facilities 35,606 12,803 48,409 provide certain secured lending facilities which are typically
Commercial real estate 8,515 374 8,889 collateralized by pooled CRE mortgage loans and are
Other 2,865 985 3,850
included in Secured lending facilities in the Institutional
Total, before ACL $ 53,575 $ 94,044 $ 147,619
Securities Loans and Lending Commitments Held for
ACL $ (674) $ (484) $ (1,158)
Investment table above. These secured lending facilities
benefit from structural protections including cross-
collateralization and diversification across property types.
December 2023 Form 10-K 72Table of Contents
Risk Disclosures
Institutional Securities Allowance for Credit Losses—Loans against qualifying securities and monitor limits daily and,
and Lending Commitments pursuant to such guidelines, require customers to deposit
Year Ended December 31, 2023 additional collateral, or reduce debt positions, when
Secured necessary. These credit lines are primarily uncommitted loan
Lending
$ in millions Corporate Facilities CRE Other Total facilities, as we reserve the right not to make any advances or
ACL—Loans may terminate these credit lines at any time. Factors
Beginning balance $ 235 $ 153 $ 275 $ 11 $ 674 considered in the review of these loans include, but are not
Gross charge- (34) — (129) (1) (164) limited to, the loan amount, the client’s credit profile, the
offs
Recoveries 1 — — — 1 degree of leverage, collateral diversification, price volatility
Net (charge-offs)
and liquidity of the collateral. Other loans primarily include
recoveries (33) — (129) (1) (163)
Provision (release) 37 — 314 5 356 tailored lending, which typically consist of bespoke lending
Other 2 — 3 2 7 arrangements provided to ultra-high net worth clients.
Ending balance $ 241 $ 153 $ 463 $ 17 $ 874 Securities-based lending and Other loans are generally
ACL—Lending commitments secured by various types of eligible collateral, including
Beginning balance $ 411 $ 51 $ 15 $ 7 $ 484 marketable securities, private investments, commercial real
Provision (release) 16 18 11 — 45 estate and other financial assets.
Other 4 1 — (1) 4
Ending balance $ 431 $ 70 $ 26 $ 6 $ 533 Residential real estate loans consist of first- and second-lien
Total ending mortgages, including HELOCs. Our underwriting policy is
balance $ 672 $ 223 $ 489 $ 23 $ 1,407
designed to ensure that all borrowers pass an assessment of
CRE—Commercial real estate
capacity and willingness to pay, which includes an analysis
Institutional Securities HFI Loans—Ratios of Allowance for utilizing industry standard credit scoring models (e.g., FICO
Credit Losses to Balance before Allowance scores), debt-to-income ratios and assets of the borrower.
At At LTV ratios are determined based on independent third-party
December 31, December 31,
2023 2022 property appraisals and valuations, and security lien positions
Corporate 3.6% 3.6% are established through title and ownership reports. The vast
Secured lending facilities 0.4% 0.4% majority of mortgage loans, including HELOCs, are held for
Commercial real estate 5.3% 3.2% investment in the Wealth Management business segment’s
Securities-based lending and Other 0.6% 0.4% loan portfolio.
Total Institutional Securities loans 1.5% 1.3%
Wealth Management Commercial Real Estate Loans and
Wealth Management Loans and Lending Commitments Lending Commitments by Property Type
At December 31, 2023 At December 31, 2023 At December 31, 2022
Contractual Years to Maturity $ in millions Loans1 LC1 Total Loans1 LC1 Total
$ in millions <1 1-5 5-15 >15 Total Retail $ 2,180 $ 3 $ 2,183 $ 2,135 $ 6 $ 2,141
Securities-based lending Multifamily 1,891 159 2,050 1,661 142 1,803
and Other loans $ 76,923 $ 7,679 $ 1,494 $ 133 $ 86,229
Office 1,736 16 1,752 1,675 1 1,676
Residential real estate
loans 1 91 1,255 58,950 60,297 Industrial 454 — 454 330 — 330
Total loans, net of ACL $ 76,924 $ 7,770 $ 2,749 $ 59,083 $ 146,526 Hotel 400 — 400 419 — 419
Lending commitments 16,312 2,937 19 344 19,612 Other 253 — 253 183 10 193
Total exposure $ 93,236 $ 10,707 $ 2,768 $ 59,427 $ 166,138 Total $ 6,914 $ 178 $ 7,092 $ 6,403 $ 159 $ 6,562
LC–Lending Commitments
At December 31, 2022
1. Amounts include HFI loans and lending commitments. HFI loans are presented net
Contractual Years to Maturity of ACL.
$ in millions <1 1-5 5-15 >15 Total
As of December 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, our direct
Securities-based lending
and Other loans $ 80,526 $ 9,371 $ 1,692 $ 140 $ 91,729 lending against CRE totaled $7.1 billion and $6.6 billion
Residential real estate within the Wealth Management business segment, which
loans 1 32 1,375 52,968 54,376
represents 4.3% and 4.0% of total exposure reflected in the
Total loans, net of ACL $ 80,527 $ 9,403 $ 3,067 $ 53,108 $ 146,105
Lending commitments 12,408 4,501 37 323 17,269
Wealth Management Loans and Lending Commitments table
Total exposure $ 92,935 $ 13,904 $ 3,104 $ 53,431 $ 163,374 above, primarily included within Securities-based lending and
Other loans. Such loans are originated through our private
The principal Wealth Management business segment lending banking platform, are both secured and generally benefiting
activities include Securities-based lending and Residential from full or partial guarantees from high or ultra-high net
real estate loans. worth clients, which partially reduce associated credit risk. At
both December 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, greater than
Securities-based lending allows clients to borrow money 95% of the CRE loans balance in the Wealth Management
against the value of qualifying securities, generally for any business segment received guarantees. All of our lending
purpose other than purchasing, trading or carrying securities against CRE properties within Wealth Management are in the
or refinancing margin debt. We establish approved credit lines Americas region.
73 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Risk Disclosures
Wealth Management Allowance for Credit Losses—Loans and Employee Loans
Lending Commitments
For information on employee loans and related ACL, see Note
Year Ended December 31, 2023
9 to the financial statements.
Residential SBL and
$ in millions Real Estate Other Total
ACL—Loans Derivatives
Beginning balance $ 87 $ 78 $ 165
Gross charge-offs — (3) (3) Fair Value of OTC Derivative Assets
Recoveries 1 — 1 Counterparty Credit Rating1
Net (charge-offs) recoveries 1 (3) (2) $ in millions AAA AA A BBB NIG Total
Provision (release) 13 119 132 At December 31, 2023
Other (1) 1 — Less than 1 year $ 2,013 $ 16,885 $ 37,517 $ 25,529 $ 10,084 $ 92,028
Ending balance $ 100 $ 195 $ 295 1-3 years 1,013 7,274 18,451 12,757 7,360 46,855
ACL—Lending commitments 3-5 years 504 8,897 8,814 5,989 3,825 28,029
Beginning balance $ 4 $ 16 $ 20 Over 5 years 3,955 29,511 50,512 28,003 6,597 118,578
Provision (release) — (1) (1) Total, gross $ 7,485 $ 62,567 $ 115,294 $ 72,278 $ 27,866 $ 285,490
Other — (1) (1) Counterparty netting (3,691) (48,821) (86,826) (53,178) (15,888) (208,404)
Ending balance $ 4 $ 14 $ 18 Cash and securities
collateral (2,709) (10,704) (25,921) (13,025) (5,554) (57,913)
Total ending balance $ 104 $ 209 $ 313
Total, net $ 1,085 $ 3,042 $ 2,547 $ 6,075 $ 6,424 $ 19,173
As of December 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, more than Counterparty Credit Rating1
75% of Wealth Management residential real estate loans were $ in millions AAA AA A BBB NIG Total
At December 31, 2022
to borrowers with “Exceptional” or “Very Good” FICO
Less than 1 year $ 2,903 $ 18,166 $ 40,825 $ 32,373 $ 10,730 $ 104,997
scores (i.e., exceeding 740). Additionally, Wealth
1-3 years 1,818 8,648 17,113 19,365 6,974 53,918
Management’s securities-based lending portfolio remains
3-5 years 655 6,834 8,632 9,105 4,049 29,275
well-collateralized and subject to daily client margining,
Over 5 years 4,206 42,613 45,488 46,660 8,244 147,211
which includes requiring customers to deposit additional
Total, gross $ 9,582 $ 76,261 $ 112,058 $ 107,503 $ 29,997 $ 335,401
collateral or reduce debt positions, when necessary.
Counterparty netting (4,037) (60,451) (79,334) (85,786) (17,415) (247,023)
Cash and securities
Customer and Other Receivables collateral (3,632) (13,402) (28,776) (14,457) (5,198) (65,465)
Total, net $ 1,913 $ 2,408 $ 3,948 $ 7,260 $ 7,384 $ 22,913
Margin and Other Lending
At At
At At December 31, December 31,
December 31, December 31, $ in millions 2023 2022
$ in millions 2023 2022
Industry
Institutional Securities $ 24,208 $ 16,591
Financials $ 7,215 $ 6,294
Wealth Management 21,436 21,933
Utilities 4,267 5,656
Total $ 45,644 $ 38,524
Regional governments 1,319 2,052
Industrials 937 1,433
The Institutional Securities and Wealth Management business
Communications services 841 1,051
segments provide margin lending arrangements that allow
Consumer discretionary 684 290
customers to borrow against the value of qualifying securities,
Information technology 677 480
primarily for the purpose of purchasing additional securities,
Energy 533 2,851
as well as to collateralize short positions. Institutional
Consumer staples 515 687
Securities primarily includes margin loans in the Equity Healthcare 468 565
Financing business. Wealth Management includes margin Materials 383 317
loans as well as non-purpose securities-based lending on non- Sovereign governments 262 410
bank entities. Amounts may fluctuate from period to period as Real estate 167 95
overall client balances change as a result of market levels, Not-for-profit organizations 166 204
client positioning and leverage. Insurance 156 185
Other 583 343
Credit exposures arising from margin lending activities are Total $ 19,173 $ 22,913
generally mitigated by their short-term nature, the value of
1. Counterparty credit ratings are determined internally by the CRM.
collateral held and our right to call for additional margin when
collateral values decline. However, we could incur losses in We are exposed to credit risk as a dealer in OTC derivatives.
the event that the customer fails to meet margin calls and Credit risk with respect to derivative instruments arises from
collateral values decline below the loan amount. This risk is the possibility that a counterparty may fail to perform
elevated in loans backed by collateral pools with significant according to the terms of the contract. For a description of our
concentrations in individual issuers or securities with similar risk mitigation strategies, see “Credit Risk—Risk Mitigation”
risk characteristics. For a further discussion, see “Risk Factors herein.
—Credit Risk” herein.
December 2023 Form 10-K 74Table of Contents
Risk Disclosures
Credit Derivatives Country Risk
A credit derivative is a contract between a seller and buyer of Country risk exposure is the risk that events in, or that affect,
protection against the risk of a credit event occurring on one a foreign country (any country other than the U.S.) might
or more debt obligations issued by a specified reference adversely affect us. We actively manage country risk
entity. The buyer typically pays a periodic premium over the exposure through a comprehensive risk management
life of the contract and is protected for the period. If a credit framework that combines credit and other market
event occurs, the seller is required to make payment to the fundamentals and allows us to effectively identify, monitor
beneficiary based on the terms of the credit derivative and limit country risk.
contract. Credit events, as defined in the contract, may be one
or more of the following defined events: bankruptcy, Our obligor credit evaluation process defines country of risk
dissolution or insolvency of the referenced entity, failure to as the country that has the largest economic impact on the
pay, obligation acceleration, repudiation, payment obligor and may be different from the obligor's country of
moratorium and restructuring. jurisdiction. Examples where this applies may include
corporations that are incorporated in one country but that
We trade in a variety of credit derivatives and may either derive the bulk of their revenue from another and mutual
purchase or write protection on a single name or portfolio of funds incorporated in one jurisdiction but with a concentration
referenced entities. In transactions referencing a portfolio of of investments in a different country.
entities or securities, protection may be limited to a tranche of
exposure or a single name within the portfolio. We are an In addition to the direct country risk reflected in the “Top 10
active market maker in the credit derivatives markets. As a Non-U.S. Country Exposures” table below, we also have
market maker, we work to earn a bid-offer spread on client indirect country exposure, for example, from collateral
flow business and manage any residual credit or correlation received in secured financing transactions or from providing
risk on a portfolio basis. Further, we use credit derivatives to client clearing services. These indirect exposures are managed
manage our exposure to residential and commercial mortgage through the credit and market risk frameworks.
loans and corporate lending exposures. The effectiveness of
our CDS protection as a hedge of our exposures may vary We conduct periodic stress testing that seeks to measure the
depending upon a number of factors, including the contractual impact on our credit and market exposures of shocks
terms of the CDS. stemming from negative economic or political
scenarios. When deemed appropriate by our risk managers,
We actively monitor our counterparty credit risk related to the stress test scenarios include possible contagion effects and
credit derivatives. A majority of our counterparties are second order risks. This analysis, and results of the stress
composed of banks, broker-dealers, insurance and other tests, may result in the amendment of limits or exposure
financial institutions. Contracts with these counterparties may mitigation.
include provisions related to counterparty rating downgrades,
which may result in the counterparty posting additional Our sovereign exposures consist of financial contracts and
collateral to us. As with all derivative contracts, we consider obligations entered into with sovereign and local
counterparty credit risk in the valuation of our positions and governments. Our non-sovereign exposures consist of
recognize CVAs as appropriate within Trading revenues in financial contracts and obligations entered into primarily with
the income statement. corporations and financial institutions.
For additional credit exposure information on our credit Index credit derivatives are included in the following “Top 10
derivative portfolio, see Note 6 to the financial statements. Non-U.S. Country Exposures” table. Each reference entity
within an index is allocated to that reference entity’s country
of risk. Index exposures are allocated to the underlying
reference entities in proportion to the notional weighting of
each reference entity in the index, adjusted for any fair value
receivable or payable for that reference entity. Where credit
risk crosses multiple jurisdictions, for example, a CDS
purchased from an issuer in a specific country that references
bonds issued by an entity in a different country, the fair value
of the CDS is reflected in the Net counterparty exposure row
based on the country of the CDS issuer. Further, the notional
amount of the CDS adjusted for the fair value of the
receivable or payable is reflected in the Net inventory row
based on the country of the underlying reference entity.
75 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Risk Disclosures
Top 10 Non-U.S. Country Exposures Additional Information—Top 10 Non-U.S. Country
Exposures
At December 31, 2023
United
$ in millions Kingdom Korea France Brazil China Collateral Held Against Net Counterparty Exposure1
Sovereign
At
Net inventory1 $ (407) $ 6,475 $ 419 $ 3,630 $ 754 December 31,
Net counterparty exposure2 9 338 — 2 141 $ in millions 2023
Country of Risk Collateral2
Exposure before hedges (398) 6,813 419 3,632 895
Hedges3 (55) — (6) (164) — United Kingdom U.K., U.S., and France $ 7,828
Germany France, Romania, and Switzerland 4,616
Net exposure $ (453) $ 6,813 $ 413 $ 3,468 $ 895
Other U.S., Spain, and Italy 14,592
Non-sovereign
Net inventory1 $ 1,335 $ 65 $ 1,524 $ 127 $ 2,022 1. The benefit of collateral received is reflected in the Top 10 Non-U.S. Country
Exposures at December 31, 2023.
Net counterparty exposure2 6,566 643 2,670 428 136 2. Primarily consists of cash and government obligations of the countries listed.
Loans 8,035 14 858 424 455
Lending commitments 7,966 49 3,166 310 637 Operational Risk
Exposure before hedges 23,902 771 8,218 1,289 3,250
Hedges3 (1,952) — (1,984) (18) (1) Operational risk refers to the risk of loss, or of damage to our
Net exposure $ 21,950 $ 771 $ 6,234 $ 1,271 $ 3,249 reputation, resulting from inadequate or failed processes or
Total net exposure $ 21,497 $ 7,584 $ 6,647 $ 4,739 $ 4,144 systems, from human factors or from external events (e.g.,
cyberattacks or third-party vulnerabilities) that may manifest
$ in millions Australia Canada Spain India Germany as, for example, loss of information, business disruption, theft
Sovereign
and fraud, legal and compliance risks, or damage to physical
Net inventory1 $ 286 $ 264 $ 197 $ 1,563 $ (3,745)
assets. We may incur operational risk across the full scope of
Net counterparty exposure2 79 62 — — 77
our business activities, including revenue-generating activities
Exposure before hedges 365 326 197 1,563 (3,668)
Hedges3 — — (8) — (262) and support and control groups (e.g., IT and trade processing).
Net exposure $ 365 $ 326 $ 189 $ 1,563 $ (3,930)
We have established an operational risk framework to
Non-sovereign
identify, measure, monitor and control risk across the Firm.
Net inventory1 $ 201 $ 407 $ 330 $ 925 $ 872
Effective operational risk management is essential to reducing
Net counterparty exposure2 575 1,058 332 950 2,696
the impact of operational risk incidents and mitigating legal,
Loans 1,696 402 1,952 118 896
regulatory and reputational risks. The framework is
Lending commitments 1,093 1,592 1,135 — 4,618
continually evolving to account for changes in the Firm and to
Exposure before hedges 3,565 3,459 3,749 1,993 9,082
Hedges3 (14) (91) (340) — (1,937) respond to the changing regulatory and business environment.
Net exposure $ 3,551 $ 3,368 $ 3,409 $ 1,993 $ 7,145
We have implemented operational risk data and assessment
Total net exposure $ 3,916 $ 3,694 $ 3,598 $ 3,556 $ 3,215
systems to monitor and analyze internal and external
1. Net inventory represents exposure to both long and short single-name and index
operational risk events, to assess business environment and
positions (i.e., bonds and equities at fair value and CDS based on a notional
amount assuming zero recovery adjusted for the fair value of any receivable or internal control factors, and to perform scenario analysis. The
payable).
collected data elements are incorporated in the operational
2. Net counterparty exposure (e.g, repurchase transactions, securities lending and
OTC derivatives) is net of the benefit of collateral received and also is net by risk capital model. The model encompasses both quantitative
counterparty when legally enforceable master netting agreements are in place. For
and qualitative elements. Internal loss data and scenario
more information, see “Additional Information—Top 10 Non-U.S. Country
Exposures” herein. analysis results are direct inputs to the capital model, while
3. Amounts represent net CDS hedges (purchased and sold) on net counterparty
exposure and lending executed by trading desks responsible for hedging external operational incidents, business environment and
counterparty and lending credit risk exposures. Amounts are based on the CDS internal control factors are evaluated as part of the scenario
notional amount assuming zero recovery adjusted for the fair value of any
receivable or payable. For further description of the contractual terms for purchased analysis process.
credit protection and whether they may limit the effectiveness of our hedges, see
“Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Risk—Credit Risk—Derivatives"
In addition, we employ a variety of risk processes and
herein.
mitigants to manage our operational risk exposures. These
include a governance framework, a comprehensive risk
management program and insurance. Operational risks and
associated risk exposures are assessed relative to the risk
appetite reviewed and confirmed by the Board and are
prioritized accordingly.
The breadth and range of operational risk are such that the
types of mitigating activities are wide-ranging. Examples of
activities include: continuous enhancement of defenses
against cyberattacks, use of legal agreements and contracts to
transfer and/or limit operational risk exposures, due diligence,
December 2023 Form 10-K 76Table of Contents
Risk Disclosures
implementation of enhanced policies and procedures, applied consistently Firmwide and is aligned with regulatory
technology change management controls, exception requirements.
management processing controls, and segregation of duties.
Third-Party Risk Management
Primary responsibility for the management of operational risk
is with the business segments, the control groups and the In connection with our ongoing operations, we utilize the
business managers therein. The business managers maintain services of third-party suppliers, which we anticipate will
processes and controls designed to identify, assess, manage, continue and may increase in the future. These services
mitigate and report operational risk. Each of the business include, for example, outsourced processing and support
segments has a designated operational risk coordinator. The functions and other professional services. Our risk-based
operational risk coordinator regularly reviews operational risk approach to managing exposure to these services includes the
issues and reports to our senior management within each performance of due diligence, implementation of service-level
business. Each control group also has a designated operational and other contractual agreements, consideration of operational
risk coordinator and a forum for discussing operational risk risks and ongoing monitoring of third-party suppliers’
matters with our senior management. Oversight of operational performance. We maintain and continue to enhance our third-
risk is provided by the Non-Financial Risk Committee, legal party risk management program, which is designed to align
entity risk committees, regional risk committees and senior with our risk tolerance and meet regulatory requirements. The
management. In the event of a merger, joint venture, program includes appropriate governance, policies,
divestiture, reorganization, or creation of a new legal entity, a procedures and enabling technology. The third-party risk
new product, or a business activity, operational risks are management program includes the adoption of appropriate
considered, and any necessary changes in processes or risk management controls and practices throughout the third-
controls are implemented. party management life cycle to manage risk of service failure,
risk of data loss and reputational risk, among others.
The Operational Risk Department provides independent
oversight of operational risk and assesses, measures and Model Risk
monitors operational risk against appetite. The Operational
Risk Department works with the divisions and control groups Model risk refers to the potential for adverse consequences
to embed a transparent, consistent and comprehensive from decisions based on incorrect or misused model outputs.
framework for managing operational risk within each area and Model risk can lead to financial loss, poor business and
across the Firm. strategic decision-making or damage to our reputation. The
risk inherent in a model is a function of the materiality,
The Operational Risk Department scope includes oversight of complexity and uncertainty around inputs and assumptions.
technology risk, cybersecurity risk, information security risk,
the fraud risk management and prevention program, and third- Model risk is generated from the use of models impacting
party risk management (supplier and affiliate risk oversight financial statements, regulatory filings, capital adequacy
and assessment), among others. assessments and the formulation of strategy.
Cybersecurity Sound model risk management is an integral part of our Risk
Management Framework. The Model Risk Management
For a discussion of our Cybersecurity Program, see Department (“MRM”) is a distinct department in Risk
“Cybersecurity.” Management responsible for the oversight of model risk.
Firm Resilience The MRM establishes a model risk tolerance in line with our
risk appetite. The tolerance is based on an assessment of the
The Firm’s critical processes and businesses could be materiality of the risk of financial loss or reputational damage
disrupted by events including cyberattacks, failure or loss of due to errors in design, implementation and/or inappropriate
access to technology and/or associated data, military conflicts, use of models. The tolerance is monitored through model-
acts of terror, natural disasters, severe weather events and specific and aggregate business-level assessments, which are
infectious disease. The Firm maintains a resilience program based upon qualitative and quantitative factors.
designed to provide for operational resilience and enable it to
respond to and recover critical processes and supporting The effective challenge of models consists of critical analysis
assets in the event of a disruption impacting our people, by objective, informed parties who can identify model
technology, facilities and third parties. The key elements of limitations and assumptions and drive appropriate changes.
the Firm’s resilience program include business continuity The MRM provides effective challenge of models,
management, technology disaster recovery, third party independently validates and approves models for use,
resilience and key business service resilience. Resilience annually recertifies models, periodically revalidates, identifies
testing is performed both internally and with critical third and tracks remediation plans for model limitations and reports
parties to validate recovery capability in accordance with on model risk metrics. The department also oversees the
business requirements. The Firm’s resilience program is
77 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Risk Disclosures
development of controls to support a complete and accurate rules, related self-regulatory organization standards and codes
Firmwide model inventory. of conduct applicable to our business activities. This risk also
includes contractual and commercial risk, such as the risk that
Liquidity Risk a counterparty’s performance obligations will be
unenforceable. It also includes compliance with AML,
Liquidity risk refers to the risk that we will be unable to terrorist financing, and anti-corruption rules and regulations.
finance our operations due to a loss of access to the capital We are generally subject to extensive regulation in the
markets or difficulty in liquidating our assets. Liquidity risk different jurisdictions in which we conduct our business (see
also encompasses our ability (or perceived ability) to meet our also “Business—Supervision and Regulation” and “Risk
financial obligations without experiencing significant Factors”).
business disruption or reputational damage that may threaten
our viability as a going concern. Liquidity risk also We have established procedures based on legal and regulatory
encompasses the associated funding risks triggered by the requirements on a worldwide basis that are designed to
market or idiosyncratic stress events that may negatively facilitate compliance with applicable statutory and regulatory
affect our liquidity and may impact our ability to raise new requirements and to require that our policies relating to
funding. Generally, we incur liquidity and funding risk as a business conduct, ethics and practices are followed globally.
result of our trading, lending, investing and client facilitation In addition, we have established procedures to mitigate the
activities. risk that a counterparty’s performance obligations will be
unenforceable, including consideration of counterparty legal
Our Liquidity Risk Management Framework is critical to authority and capacity, adequacy of legal documentation, the
helping ensure that we maintain sufficient liquidity reserves permissibility of a transaction under applicable law and
and durable funding sources to meet our daily obligations and whether applicable bankruptcy or insolvency laws limit or
to withstand unanticipated stress events. The Liquidity Risk alter contractual remedies. The heightened legal and
Department is a distinct area in Risk Management responsible regulatory focus on the financial services and banking
for the oversight and monitoring of liquidity risk. The industries globally presents a continuing business challenge
Liquidity Risk Department ensures transparency of material for us.
liquidity and funding risks, compliance with established risk
limits and escalation of risk concentrations to appropriate Climate Risk
senior management.
Climate change manifests as physical and transition risks. The
To execute these responsibilities, the Liquidity Risk physical risks of climate change include harm to people and
Department establishes limits in line with our risk appetite, property arising from acute climate-related events, such as
identifies and analyzes emerging liquidity and funding risks to floods, hurricanes, heatwaves, droughts and wildfires, and
ensure such risks are appropriately mitigated, monitors and chronic, longer-term shifts in climate patterns, such as higher
reports risk exposures against metrics and limits, and reviews global average temperatures, rising sea levels and long-term
the methodologies and assumptions underpinning our droughts. The transition risk of climate change include policy,
Liquidity Stress Tests to ensure sufficient liquidity and legal, technology and market changes. Examples of these
funding under a range of adverse scenarios. transition risks include changes in consumer behavior and
business sentiment, related technologies, shareholder
The Treasury Department and applicable business units have
preferences and any additional regulatory and legislative
primary responsibility for evaluating, monitoring and
requirements, including increased disclosure or carbon taxes.
controlling the liquidity and funding risks arising from our
business activities and for maintaining processes and controls Climate risk, which is not expected to have a significant effect
to manage the key risks inherent in their respective areas. The on our consolidated results of operations or financial
Liquidity Risk Department coordinates with the Treasury condition in the near term, is an overarching risk that can
Department and these business units to help ensure a impact other categories of risk. Physical risk may lead to
consistent and comprehensive framework for managing increased credit risk by diminishing borrowers’ repayment
liquidity and funding risk across the Firm. See also capacity or impacting the value of collateral. In addition,
“Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial physical risk could pose increased operational risk to our
Condition and Results of Operations—Liquidity and Capital facilities and people. The impacts of transition risk may lead
Resources” herein. to and amplify credit, market or liquidity risk by reducing our
customers’ operating income or the value of their assets as
Legal, Regulatory and Compliance Risk
well as exposing us to reputational, compliance and/or
litigation risk due to increased legal and regulatory scrutiny or
Legal, regulatory and compliance risk includes the risk of
negative public sentiment.
legal or regulatory sanctions, material financial loss, including
fines, penalties, judgments, damages and/or settlements, As climate risk is interconnected with other risk types, we
limitations on our business, or loss to reputation that we may have developed and continue to enhance processes to embed
suffer as a result of failure to comply with laws, regulations, climate risk considerations into our risk management
December 2023 Form 10-K 78Table of Contents
Risk Disclosures
practices and governance structures. The BRC oversees
Firmwide risks, which include climate risk, and, as part of its
oversight, receives updates on our risk management approach
to climate risk, including our approaches toward scenario
analysis and integration of climate risk into our existing risk
management processes. Our climate risk management efforts
are overseen by the Climate Risk Committee, which is co-
chaired by our Chief Risk Officer and Chief Sustainability
Officer and shapes our approach to managing climate-related
risks in line with our overall risk framework.
79 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Shareholders and the Board of Directors of Morgan Stanley:
Opinion on the Financial Statements Critical Audit Matter
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets The critical audit matter communicated below is a matter arising
of Morgan Stanley and subsidiaries (the “Firm”) as of December from the current-period audit of the financial statements that was
31, 2023 and 2022, the related consolidated income statements, communicated or required to be communicated to the audit
comprehensive income statements, cash flow statements and committee and that (1) relates to accounts or disclosures that are
statements of changes in total equity for each of the three years in material to the financial statements and (2) involved our
the period ended December 31, 2023, and the related notes especially challenging, subjective, or complex judgments. The
(collectively referred to as the “financial statements”). In our communication of critical audit matters does not alter in any way
opinion, the financial statements present fairly, in all material our opinion on the financial statements, taken as a whole, and we
respects, the financial position of the Firm as of December 31, are not, by communicating the critical audit matter below,
2023 and 2022, and the results of its operations and its cash flows providing a separate opinion on the critical audit matter or on the
for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, accounts or disclosures to which it relates.
2023, in conformity with accounting principles generally
Valuation of Level 3 Financial Assets and Liabilities
accepted in the United States of America.
Carried at Fair Value on a Recurring Basis and Level 3
We have also audited, in accordance with the standards of the Loans Held for Sale — Refer to Note 4 to the financial
Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) statements
(PCAOB), the Firm’s internal control over financial reporting as
of December 31, 2023, based on criteria established in Internal Critical Audit Matter Description
Control — Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway The Firm’s trading and financing activities result in the Firm
Commission and our report dated February 22, 2024, expressed carrying material financial instruments having limited price
an unqualified opinion on the Firm’s internal control over transparency. These financial instruments can span a broad array
financial reporting. of product types and generally include derivatives, securities,
loans, and borrowings. As described in Note 4, these Level 3
Basis for Opinion financial assets and liabilities carried at fair value on a recurring
basis approximate $9.3 billion and $6.2 billion, respectively, and
These financial statements are the responsibility of the Firm’s the Level 3 loans held for sale approximate $6.7 billion at
management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the December 31, 2023. Unlike financial instruments whose inputs
Firm’s financial statements based on our audits. We are a public are readily observable and, therefore, more easily independently
accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are required to corroborated, the valuation of these financial instruments is
be independent with respect to the Firm in accordance with the inherently subjective and often involves the use of unobservable
U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and inputs and proprietary valuation models whose underlying
regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the algorithms and valuation methodologies are complex.
PCAOB.
We identified the valuation of Level 3 financial assets and
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the liabilities carried at fair value on a recurring basis and Level 3
PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the loans held for sale as a critical audit matter given the Firm uses
audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial complex valuation models and/or valuation inputs that are not
statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error observable in the marketplace to determine the respective
or fraud. Our audits included performing procedures to assess the carrying values. Performing our audit procedures to evaluate the
risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, appropriateness of these models and inputs involved a high
whether due to error or fraud, and performing procedures that degree of auditor judgment, professionals with specialized skills
respond to those risks. Such procedures included examining, on a and knowledge, and an increased extent of testing.
test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the
How the Critical Audit Matter Was Addressed in the Audit
financial statements. Our audits also included evaluating the
accounting principles used and significant estimates made by
management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the Our audit procedures related to the valuation of Level 3 financial
financial statements. We believe that our audits provide a assets and liabilities carried at fair value on a recurring basis and
reasonable basis for our opinion. Level 3 loans held for sale included the following, among others:
• We tested the design and operating effectiveness of the Firm’s
model review and price verification controls. The Firm
maintains these internal controls to assess the appropriateness
December 2023 Form 10-K 80Table of Contents
of its valuation methodologies and the relevant inputs and
assumptions.
• We independently evaluated the appropriateness of
management’s valuation methodologies, for selected financial
instruments, including the input assumptions, considering the
expected assumptions of other market participants and external
data when available.
• We developed independent estimates for selected financial
instruments, using externally sourced inputs and independent
valuation models, and used such estimates to further evaluate
management’s estimates. For certain of our selected financial
instruments, this included a comparison to the Firm’s estimates
for similar transactions and an evaluation of the Firm’s
assumptions inclusive of the inputs, as applicable.
• We tested the revenues arising from the trade date fair value
estimates for selected structured transactions for which we
developed independent fair value estimates to test the
valuation inputs and assumptions used by the Firm and
evaluated whether these methods were consistent with the
Firm’s relevant valuation policies.
• We assessed the consistency by which management has
applied significant and unobservable valuation assumptions
used in developing the Firm's estimates.
• We performed a retrospective assessment of management’s
fair value estimates for certain of our selected financial
instruments, for which there were events or transactions
occurring after the valuation date. We did so by comparing
management’s estimates to the relevant evidence provided by
such events or transactions, as applicable.
/s/ Deloitte & Touche LLP
New York, New York
February 22, 2024
We have served as the Firm’s auditor since 1997.
81 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Consolidated Income Statement
in millions, except per share data 2023 2022 2021
Revenues
Investment banking $ 4,948 $ 5,599 $ 10,994
Trading 15,263 13,928 12,810
Investments 573 15 1,376
Commissions and fees 4,537 4,938 5,521
Asset management 19,617 19,578 19,967
Other 975 283 1,042
Total non-interest revenues 45,913 44,341 51,710
Interest income 50,281 21,595 9,411
Interest expense 42,051 12,268 1,366
Net interest 8,230 9,327 8,045
Net revenues 54,143 53,668 59,755
Provision for credit losses 532 280 4
Non-interest expenses
Compensation and benefits 24,558 23,053 24,628
Brokerage, clearing and exchange fees 3,476 3,458 3,341
Information processing and communications 3,775 3,493 3,119
Professional services 3,058 3,070 2,933
Occupancy and equipment 1,895 1,729 1,725
Marketing and business development 898 905 643
Other 4,138 3,591 3,694
Total non-interest expenses 41,798 39,299 40,083
Income before provision for income taxes 11,813 14,089 19,668
Provision for income taxes 2,583 2,910 4,548
Net income $ 9,230 $ 11,179 $ 15,120
Net income applicable to noncontrolling interests 143 150 86
Net income applicable to Morgan Stanley $ 9,087 $ 11,029 $ 15,034
Preferred stock dividends 557 489 468
Earnings applicable to Morgan Stanley common shareholders $ 8,530 $ 10,540 $ 14,566
Earnings per common share
Basic $ 5.24 $ 6.23 $ 8.16
Diluted 5.18 6.15 8.03
Average common shares outstanding
Basic 1,628 1,691 1,785
Diluted 1,646 1,713 1,814
Consolidated Comprehensive Income Statement
$ in millions 2023 2022 2021
Net income $ 9,230 $ 11,179 $ 15,120
Other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax:
Foreign currency translation adjustments (20) (337) (331)
Change in net unrealized gains (losses) on available-for-sale securities 1,098 (4,437) (1,542)
Pension and other (87) 43 (53)
Change in net debt valuation adjustment (1,290) 1,502 696
Net change in cash flow hedges 20 (4) —
Total other comprehensive income (loss) $ (279) $ (3,233) $ (1,230)
Comprehensive income $ 8,951 $ 7,946 $ 13,890
Net income applicable to noncontrolling interests 143 150 86
Other comprehensive income (loss) applicable to noncontrolling interests (111) (82) (90)
Comprehensive income applicable to Morgan Stanley $ 8,919 $ 7,878 $ 13,894
December 2023 Form 10-K 82 See Notes to Consolidated Financial StatementsTable of Contents
Consolidated Balance Sheet
At At
December 31, December 31,
$ in millions, except share data 2023 2022
Assets
Cash and cash equivalents $ 89,232 $ 128,127
Trading assets at fair value ($162,698 and $124,411 were pledged to various parties) 367,074 301,315
Investment securities:
Available-for-sale at fair value (amortized cost of $92,149 and $89,772) 88,113 84,297
Held-to-maturity (fair value of $57,453 and $65,006) 66,694 75,634
Securities purchased under agreements to resell (includes $7 and $8 at fair value) 110,740 113,907
Securities borrowed 121,091 133,374
Customer and other receivables 80,105 78,540
Loans:
Held for investment (net of allowance for credit losses of $1,169 and $839) 203,385 198,997
Held for sale 15,255 14,788
Goodwill 16,707 16,652
Intangible assets (net of accumulated amortization of $4,847 and $4,253) 7,055 7,618
Other assets 28,242 26,982
Total assets $ 1,193,693 $ 1,180,231
Liabilities
Deposits (includes $6,472 and $4,796 at fair value) $ 351,804 $ 356,646
Trading liabilities at fair value 151,513 154,438
Securities sold under agreements to repurchase (includes $1,020 and $864 at fair value) 62,651 62,534
Securities loaned 15,057 15,679
Other secured financings (includes $9,899 and $4,550 at fair value) 12,655 8,158
Customer and other payables 208,148 216,134
Other liabilities and accrued expenses 28,151 27,353
Borrowings (includes $93,900 and $78,720 at fair value) 263,732 238,058
Total liabilities 1,093,711 1,079,000
Commitments and contingent liabilities (see Note 14)
Equity
Morgan Stanley shareholders’ equity:
Preferred stock 8,750 8,750
Common stock, $0.01 par value:
Shares authorized: 3,500,000,000; Shares issued: 2,038,893,979; Shares outstanding: 1,626,828,437 and
1,675,487,409 20 20
Additional paid-in capital 29,832 29,339
Retained earnings 97,996 94,862
Employee stock trusts 5,314 4,881
Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) (6,421) (6,253)
Common stock held in treasury at cost, $0.01 par value (412,065,542 and 363,406,570 shares) (31,139) (26,577)
Common stock issued to employee stock trusts (5,314) (4,881)
Total Morgan Stanley shareholders’ equity 99,038 100,141
Noncontrolling interests 944 1,090
Total equity 99,982 101,231
Total liabilities and equity $ 1,193,693 $ 1,180,231
See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 83 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Total Equity
$ in millions 2023 2022 2021
Preferred Stock
Beginning balance $ 8,750 $ 7,750 $ 9,250
Issuance of preferred stock — 1,000 1,300
Redemption of preferred stock — — (2,800)
Ending balance 8,750 8,750 7,750
Common Stock
Beginning and ending balance 20 20 20
Additional Paid-in Capital
Beginning balance 29,339 28,841 25,546
Share-based award activity 493 503 1,117
Issuance of preferred stock — (6) (25)
Issuance of common stock for the acquisition of Eaton Vance — — 2,185
Other net increases (decreases) — 1 18
Ending balance 29,832 29,339 28,841
Retained Earnings
Beginning balance 94,862 89,432 78,694
Net income applicable to Morgan Stanley 9,087 11,029 15,034
Preferred stock dividends1 (557) (489) (468)
Common stock dividends1 (5,393) (5,108) (3,818)
Other net increases (decreases) (3) (2) (10)
Ending balance 97,996 94,862 89,432
Employee Stock Trusts
Beginning balance 4,881 3,955 3,043
Share-based award activity 433 926 912
Ending balance 5,314 4,881 3,955
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (Loss)
Beginning balance (6,253) (3,102) (1,962)
Net change in Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) (168) (3,151) (1,140)
Ending balance (6,421) (6,253) (3,102)
Common Stock Held in Treasury at Cost
Beginning balance (26,577) (17,500) (9,767)
Share-based award activity 1,654 1,794 1,210
Repurchases of common stock and employee tax withholdings (6,216) (10,871) (12,075)
Issuance of common stock for the acquisition of Eaton Vance — — 3,132
Ending balance (31,139) (26,577) (17,500)
Common Stock Issued to Employee Stock Trusts
Beginning balance (4,881) (3,955) (3,043)
Share-based award activity (433) (926) (912)
Ending balance (5,314) (4,881) (3,955)
Noncontrolling Interests
Beginning balance 1,090 1,157 1,368
Net income applicable to noncontrolling interests 143 150 86
Net change in Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) applicable to noncontrolling
interests (111) (82) (90)
Other net increases (decreases) (178) (135) (207)
Ending balance 944 1,090 1,157
Total Equity $ 99,982 $ 101,231 $ 106,598
1. See Note 17 for information regarding dividends per share for each class of stock.
December 2023 Form 10-K 84 See Notes to Consolidated Financial StatementsTable of Contents
Consolidated Cash Flow Statement
$ in millions 2023 2022 2021
Cash flows from operating activities
Net income $ 9,230 $ 11,179 $ 15,120
Adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by (used for) operating activities:
Deferred income taxes (463) (849) 4
Stock-based compensation expense 1,709 1,875 2,085
Depreciation and amortization 4,256 3,998 4,216
Provision for credit losses 532 280 4
Other operating adjustments 308 618 (147)
Changes in assets and liabilities:
Trading assets, net of Trading liabilities (61,026) (39,422) 9,075
Securities borrowed 12,283 (3,661) (17,322)
Securities loaned (622) 3,380 4,568
Customer and other receivables and other assets 602 14,664 774
Customer and other payables and other liabilities (3,629) (4,897) 7,758
Securities purchased under agreements to resell 3,167 6,092 (3,765)
Securities sold under agreements to repurchase 117 346 11,601
Net cash provided by (used for) operating activities (33,536) (6,397) 33,971
Cash flows from investing activities
Proceeds from (payments for):
Other assets—Premises, equipment and software (3,412) (3,078) (2,308)
Changes in loans, net (4,059) (23,652) (36,106)
AFS securities:
Purchases (23,078) (24,602) (42,469)
Proceeds from sales 5,929 22,014 20,652
Proceeds from paydowns and maturities 14,316 13,435 26,375
HTM securities:
Purchases — (5,231) (27,102)
Proceeds from paydowns and maturities 8,143 9,829 14,541
Cash paid as part of the Eaton Vance acquisition, net of cash acquired — — (2,648)
Other investing activities (923) (347) (832)
Net cash provided by (used for) investing activities (3,084) (11,632) (49,897)
Cash flows from financing activities
Net proceeds from (payments for):
Other secured financings 796 (884) (625)
Deposits (5,075) 1,659 36,897
Issuance of preferred stock, net of issuance costs — 994 1,275
Proceeds from issuance of Borrowings 78,424 72,460 90,273
Payments for:
Borrowings (64,805) (34,898) (70,124)
Repurchases of common stock and employee tax withholdings (6,178) (10,871) (12,075)
Cash dividends (5,763) (5,401) (4,171)
Other financing activities (125) (345) 97
Net cash provided by (used for) financing activities (2,726) 22,714 41,547
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents 451 (4,283) (3,550)
Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents (38,895) 402 22,071
Cash and cash equivalents, at beginning of period 128,127 127,725 105,654
Cash and cash equivalents, at end of period $ 89,232 $ 128,127 $ 127,725
Supplemental Disclosure of Cash Flow Information
Cash payments for:
Interest $ 41,940 $ 9,819 $ 1,303
Income taxes, net of refunds 2,035 4,147 4,231
See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 85 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
1. Introduction and Basis of Presentation corporations. Individual clients are generally served
through intermediaries, including affiliated and non-
The Firm affiliated distributors.
Morgan Stanley is a global financial services firm that Basis of Financial Information
maintains significant market positions in each of its business
segments—Institutional Securities, Wealth Management and The financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S.
Investment Management. Morgan Stanley, through its GAAP, which requires the Firm to make estimates and
subsidiaries and affiliates, provides a wide variety of products assumptions regarding the valuations of certain financial
and services to a large and diversified group of clients and instruments, the valuations of goodwill and intangible assets,
customers, including corporations, governments, financial the outcome of legal and tax matters, deferred tax assets,
institutions and individuals. Unless the context otherwise ACL, and other matters that affect its financial statements and
requires, the terms “Morgan Stanley” or the “Firm” mean related disclosures. The Firm believes that the estimates
Morgan Stanley (the “Parent Company”) together with its utilized in the preparation of its financial statements are
consolidated subsidiaries. See the “Glossary of Common prudent and reasonable. Actual results could differ materially
Terms and Acronyms” for the definition of certain terms and from these estimates.
acronyms used throughout this Form 10-K.
The Notes are an integral part of the Firm’s financial
A description of the clients and principal products and statements. The Firm has evaluated subsequent events for
services of each of the Firm’s business segments is as adjustment to or disclosure in these financial statements
follows: through the date of this report and has not identified any
recordable or disclosable events not otherwise reported in
Institutional Securities provides a variety of products and these financial statements or the notes thereto.
services to corporations, governments, financial institutions
and ultra-high net worth clients. Investment Banking Consolidation
services consist of capital raising and financial advisory
services, including the underwriting of debt, equity The financial statements include the accounts of the Firm, its
securities and other products, as well as advice on mergers wholly owned subsidiaries and other entities in which the
and acquisitions, restructurings and project finance. Our Firm has a controlling financial interest, including certain
Equity and Fixed Income businesses include sales, VIEs (see Note 15). Intercompany balances and transactions
financing, prime brokerage, market-making, Asia wealth have been eliminated. For consolidated subsidiaries that are
management services and certain business-related not wholly owned, the third-party holdings of equity interests
investments. Lending activities include originating are referred to as Noncontrolling interests. The net income
corporate loans and commercial real estate loans, providing attributable to Noncontrolling interests for such subsidiaries is
secured lending facilities, and extending securities-based presented as Net income applicable to noncontrolling interests
and other financing to customers. Other activities include in the income statement. The portion of shareholders’ equity
research. that is attributable to Noncontrolling interests for such
subsidiaries is presented as Noncontrolling interests, a
Wealth Management provides a comprehensive array of component of Total equity, in the balance sheet.
financial services and solutions to individual investors and
small to medium-sized businesses and institutions covering: For entities where the total equity investment at risk is
financial advisor-led brokerage, custody, administrative and sufficient to enable the entity to finance its activities without
investment advisory services; self-directed brokerage additional subordinated financial support and the equity
services; financial and wealth planning services; workplace holders bear the residual economic risks and returns of the
services, including stock plan administration; securities- entity and have the power to direct the activities of the entity
based lending, residential real estate loans and other lending that most significantly affect its economic performance, the
products; banking; and retirement plan services. Firm consolidates those entities it controls either through a
majority voting interest or otherwise. For VIEs (i.e., entities
Investment Management provides a broad range of that do not meet the aforementioned criteria), the Firm
investment strategies and products that span geographies, consolidates those entities where it has the power to make the
asset classes, and public and private markets to a diverse decisions that most significantly affect the economic
group of clients across institutional and intermediary performance of the VIE and has the obligation to absorb
channels. Strategies and products, which are offered losses or the right to receive benefits that could potentially be
through a variety of investment vehicles, include equity, significant to the VIE.
fixed income, alternatives and solutions, and liquidity and
overlay services. Institutional clients include defined For investments in entities in which the Firm does not have a
benefit/defined contribution plans, foundations, controlling financial interest but has significant influence over
endowments, government entities, sovereign wealth funds, operating and financial decisions, it applies the equity method
insurance companies, third-party fund sponsors and of accounting with net gains and losses recorded within Other
December 2023 Form 10-K 86Table of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
revenues (see Note 11) unless the Firm has elected to measure related to sales and trading activities; and sales of mutual
the investment at fair value, in which case net gains and losses funds, alternative funds, futures, insurance products and
are recorded within Investments revenues (see Note 5). options, as well as revenues from order flow payments for
directing customer orders to broker-dealers, exchanges and
Equity and partnership interests held by entities qualifying for market centers for execution. Commission and fee revenues
accounting purposes as investment companies are carried at are recognized on trade date when the performance obligation
fair value. is satisfied.
The Firm’s significant regulated U.S. and international Asset Management Revenues
subsidiaries include:
Asset management, distribution and administration fees are
• Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC (“MS&Co.”), generally based on related asset levels, such as the AUM of a
• Morgan Stanley Smith Barney LLC (“MSSB”), customer’s account or the net asset value of a fund. These fees
• Morgan Stanley Europe SE (“MSESE”), are generally recognized when services are performed and the
• Morgan Stanley & Co. International plc (“MSIP”), value of the assets is known. Management fees are reduced by
• Morgan Stanley Capital Services LLC (“MSCS”), estimated fee waivers and expense caps, if any, provided to
• Morgan Stanley Capital Group Inc. (“MSCG”), the customer.
• Morgan Stanley MUFG Securities Co., Ltd. (“MSMS”),
• Morgan Stanley Bank, N.A. (“MSBNA”) and Performance-based fees not in the form of carried interest are
• Morgan Stanley Private Bank, National Association recorded when the annual performance target is met and the
(“MSPBNA”). revenues are not probable of a significant reversal.
For further information on the Firm’s significant regulated Sales commissions paid by the Firm in connection with the
U.S. and international subsidiaries, see Note 16. sale of certain classes of shares of its open-end mutual fund
products are accounted for as deferred commission assets and
2. Significant Accounting Policies amortized to Other expenses over the expected life of the
contract. The Firm periodically tests deferred commission
Revenue Recognition assets for recoverability based on cash flows expected to be
received in future periods. Other asset management and
Revenues are recognized when the promised goods or distribution costs are recognized as incurred in the relevant
services are delivered to our customers in an amount that is non-interest expenses line items.
based on the consideration the Firm expects to receive in
exchange for those goods or services when such amounts are Investments Revenues—Carried Interest
not probable of significant reversal.
The Firm is entitled to receive performance-based fees in the
Investment Banking form of carried interest when the return in certain funds
exceeds specified performance targets. When the Firm earns
Revenues from investment banking activities consist of carried interest from funds as specified performance
revenues earned from underwriting, primarily equity and thresholds are met, that carried interest and any related
fixed income securities and loan syndications, and advisory general or limited partner interest are accounted for under the
fees, primarily for mergers, acquisitions and restructurings. equity method of accounting and measured based on the
Firm’s claim on the NAV of the fund at the reporting date,
Underwriting revenues are generally recognized on trade date taking into account the distribution terms applicable to the
if there is no uncertainty or contingency related to the amount interest held. Such items are reflected within Investments
to be paid. Underwriting costs are deferred and recognized in revenues.
the relevant non-interest expenses line items when the related
underwriting revenues are recorded. See Note 22 for information regarding the net cumulative
unrealized amount of performance-based fee revenues at risk
Advisory fees are recognized as advice is provided to the of reversal. See Note 14 for information regarding general
client, based on the estimated progress of work and when partner guarantees, which include potential obligations to
revenues are not probable of a significant reversal. Advisory return performance fee distributions previously received.
costs are recognized as incurred in the relevant non-interest
expenses line items, including those reimbursed. Other Items
Commissions and Fees Revenues from certain commodities-related contracts are
recognized in Trading revenues when the Firm has transferred
Commission and fee revenues generally result from control over the promised goods or services to the customer.
transaction-based arrangements in which the client is charged
a fee for the execution of transactions. Such revenues Receivables from contracts with customers are recognized in
primarily arise from transactions in equity securities; services Customer and other receivables in the balance sheet when the
87 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
underlying performance obligations have been satisfied and within Trading revenues or Investments revenues. Otherwise,
the Firm has the right per the contract to bill the customer. it is recorded within Interest income or Interest expense.
Contract assets are recognized in Other assets when the Firm Dividend income is recorded in Trading revenues or
has satisfied its performance obligations but customer Investments revenues depending on the business activity.
payment is conditional on something other than the passage of
time. Contract liabilities are recognized in Other liabilities The fair value of OTC financial instruments, including
and accrued expenses when the Firm has collected payment derivative contracts related to financial instruments and
from a customer based on the terms of the contract but the commodities, is presented in the accompanying balance sheet
underlying performance obligations are not yet satisfied. on a net-by-counterparty basis, when appropriate.
Additionally, the Firm nets the fair value of cash collateral
For contracts with a term of less than one year, incremental paid or received against the fair value amounts recognized for
costs to obtain the contract are expensed as incurred. net derivative positions executed with the same counterparty
Revenues are not discounted when payment is expected under the same master netting agreement.
within one year.
Fair Value Option
The Firm generally presents, net within revenues, taxes
assessed by a governmental authority that are both imposed The Firm has elected to measure certain eligible instruments
on and concurrent with a specific revenue-producing at fair value, including Securities purchased under agreements
transaction and collected by the Firm from a customer. to resell, Loans and lending commitments, equity method
investments and certain other assets, Deposits, Securities sold
Cash and Cash Equivalents under agreements to repurchase, Other secured financings and
Borrowings.
Cash and cash equivalents consist of Cash and due from
banks and Interest-bearing deposits with banks. Cash Fair Value Measurement—Definition and Hierarchy
equivalents are highly liquid investments with remaining
maturities of three months or less from the acquisition date Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell
that are readily convertible to cash and are not held for trading an asset or paid to transfer a liability (i.e., the “exit price”) in
purposes. an orderly transaction between market participants at the
measurement date.
Cash and cash equivalents also include Restricted cash, such
as cash segregated in compliance with federal or other Fair value is a market-based measure considered from the
regulations, including minimum reserve requirements set by perspective of a market participant rather than an entity-
the Federal Reserve Bank and other central banks, and the specific measure. Therefore, even when market assumptions
Firm’s initial margin deposited with clearing organizations. are not readily available, assumptions are set to reflect those
that the Firm believes market participants would use in
Fair Value of Financial Instruments pricing the asset or liability at the measurement date. Where
the Firm manages a group of financial assets, financial
Instruments within Trading assets and Trading liabilities are liabilities, and nonfinancial items accounted for as derivatives
measured at fair value, either as required or allowed by on the basis of its net exposure to either market risks or credit
accounting guidance. These financial instruments primarily risk, the Firm measures the fair value of that group of
represent the Firm’s trading and investment positions and financial instruments consistently with how market
include both cash and derivative products. In addition, participants would price the net risk exposure at the
securities classified as Available-for-Sale (“AFS”) are measurement date.
measured at fair value.
In determining fair value, the Firm uses various valuation
Gains and losses on instruments carried at fair value are approaches and establishes a hierarchy for inputs used in
reflected in Trading revenues, Investments revenues or measuring fair value that requires the most observable inputs
Investment banking revenues in the income statement, except be used when available.
for gains and losses related to AFS securities (see “AFS
Investment Securities” section herein and Note 7) and Observable inputs are inputs that market participants would
derivatives accounted for as hedges, as well as economic use in pricing the asset or liability that were developed based
derivative hedges associated with certain held-for-sale and on market data obtained from sources independent of the
held-for-investment corporate loans and lending commitments Firm. Unobservable inputs are inputs that reflect assumptions
(see “Hedge Accounting” and “Other Hedges” herein and the Firm believes other market participants would use in
Note 6). pricing the asset or liability that are developed based on the
best information available in the circumstances. The fair value
Interest income and interest expense are recorded within the hierarchy is broken down into three levels based on the
income statement depending on the nature of the instrument observability of inputs as follows, with Level 1 being the
and related market conventions. When interest is included as a highest and Level 3 being the lowest level:
component of the instruments’ fair value, interest is recorded
December 2023 Form 10-K 88Table of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Level 1. Valuations based on quoted prices in active markets including, where applicable, commodity prices, equity prices,
that the Firm has the ability to access for identical assets or interest rate yield curves, credit curves, correlation,
liabilities. Valuation adjustments, block discounts and creditworthiness of the counterparty, creditworthiness of the
discounts for entity-specific and contractual restrictions that Firm, option volatility and currency rates.
would not transfer to market participants are not applied to
Level 1 instruments. Since valuations are based on quoted Where appropriate, valuation adjustments are made to account
prices that are readily and regularly available in an active for various factors such as liquidity risk (bid-ask
market, valuation of these products does not entail a adjustments), credit quality, model uncertainty, and
significant degree of judgment. concentration risk and funding in order to arrive at fair value.
Adjustments for liquidity risk adjust model-derived mid-
Level 2. Valuations based on quoted prices for similar assets market amounts of Level 2 and Level 3 financial instruments
or liabilities in active markets, quoted prices for identical or for the bid-mid or mid-ask spread required to properly reflect
similar assets or liabilities in inactive markets, significant the exit price of a risk position. Bid-mid and mid-ask spreads
market inputs other than quoted prices that are observable for are marked to levels observed in trade activity, broker quotes
the asset or liability, or market-corroborated inputs. or other external third-party data. Where these spreads are
unobservable for the particular position in question, spreads
Level 3. Valuations based on inputs that are unobservable and are derived from observable levels of similar positions.
significant to the overall fair value measurement.
The Firm applies credit-related valuation adjustments to its
The availability of observable inputs can vary from product to Borrowings for which the fair value option was elected and to
product and is affected by a wide variety of factors, including OTC derivatives. The Firm considers the impact of changes in
the type of product, whether the product is new and not yet its own credit spreads based upon observations of the
established in the marketplace, the liquidity of markets and secondary bond market spreads when measuring the fair value
other characteristics particular to the product. To the extent for Borrowings.
that valuation is based on models or inputs that are less
observable or unobservable in the market, the determination For OTC derivatives, which are recognized in Trading assets
of fair value requires more judgment. Accordingly, the degree at fair value in the balance sheet, the impact of changes in
of judgment exercised by the Firm in determining fair value is both the Firm’s and the counterparty’s credit rating is
greatest for instruments categorized in Level 3 of the fair considered when measuring fair value. In determining the
value hierarchy. expected exposure, the Firm simulates the distribution of the
future exposure to a counterparty, then applies market-based
The Firm considers prices and inputs that are current as of the default probabilities to the future exposure, leveraging
measurement date, including during periods of market external third-party CDS spread data. Where CDS spread data
dislocation. In periods of market dislocation, the observability are unavailable for a specific counterparty, bond market
of prices and inputs may be reduced for many instruments. spreads, CDS spread data based on the counterparty’s credit
This condition could cause an instrument to be reclassified rating or CDS spread data that reference a comparable
from Level 1 to Level 2 or from Level 2 to Level 3 of the fair counterparty may be utilized. The Firm also considers
value hierarchy. collateral held and legally enforceable master netting
agreements that mitigate its exposure to each counterparty.
In certain cases, the inputs used to measure fair value may fall
into different levels of the fair value hierarchy. In such cases, Adjustments for model uncertainty are taken for positions
the total fair value amount is disclosed in the level appropriate whose underlying models are reliant on significant inputs that
for the lowest level input that is significant to the total fair are neither directly nor indirectly observable, hence requiring
value of the asset or liability. reliance on established theoretical concepts in their derivation.
These adjustments are derived by making assessments of the
Valuation Techniques
possible degree of variability using statistical approaches and
market-based information where possible.
Many cash instruments and OTC derivative contracts have bid
and ask prices that can be observed in the marketplace. Bid
The Firm may apply concentration adjustments to certain of
prices reflect the highest price that a party is willing to pay for
its OTC derivative portfolios to reflect the additional cost of
an asset. Ask prices represent the lowest price that a party is
closing out a particularly large risk exposure. Where possible,
willing to accept for an asset. The Firm carries positions at the
these adjustments are based on observable
point within the bid-ask range that meets its best estimate of
market information, but in many instances, significant
fair value. For offsetting positions in the same financial
judgment is required to estimate the costs of closing
instrument, the same price within the bid-ask spread is used to
out concentrated risk exposures due to the lack of liquidity in
measure both the long and short positions.
the marketplace.
Fair value for many cash instruments and OTC derivative
The Firm applies an FVA in the fair value measurements of
contracts is derived using pricing models. Pricing models take
OTC uncollateralized or partially collateralized derivatives
into account the contract terms, as well as multiple inputs,
89 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
and in collateralized derivatives where the terms of the default. The enforceability of the master netting agreement is
agreement do not permit the reuse of the collateral received. taken into account in the Firm’s risk management practices
In general, FVA reflects a market funding risk premium and application of counterparty credit limits.
inherent in the noted derivative instruments. The methodology
for measuring FVA leverages the Firm’s existing credit- For information related to offsetting of derivatives, see Note
related valuation adjustment calculation methodologies, 6.
which apply to both assets and liabilities.
Hedge Accounting
See Note 4 for a description of valuation techniques applied to
The Firm applies hedge accounting using various derivative
the major categories of financial instruments measured at fair
financial instruments for the following types of hedges:
value.
hedges of changes in the fair value of assets and liabilities due
Assets and Liabilities Measured at Fair Value on a Non- to the risk being hedged (fair value hedges); hedges of
recurring Basis variability in forecasted cash flows from floating-rate assets
due to contractually specified interest rates (cash flow hedges)
Certain of the Firm’s assets and liabilities are measured at fair and hedges of net investments in foreign operations whose
value on a non-recurring basis. The Firm incurs losses or functional currency is different from the reporting currency of
gains for any adjustments of these assets or liabilities to fair the Parent Company (net investment hedges). These financial
value. instruments are included within Trading assets—Derivative
and other contracts or Trading liabilities—Derivative and
For assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a non- other contracts in the balance sheet. For hedges where hedge
recurring basis, fair value is determined by using various accounting is being applied, the Firm performs effectiveness
valuation approaches. The same hierarchy for inputs as testing and other procedures. The change in the fair value of
described above, which requires that observable inputs be the designated portion of the hedging instrument should be
used when available, is used in measuring fair value for these highly correlated, between 80 and 125 percent of the change
items. in the fair value, cash flows, or carrying value (due to
translation gains or losses) of the hedged item attributable to
For further information on financial assets and liabilities that
the risk being hedged. The Firm considers the impact of
are measured at fair value on a recurring and non-recurring
valuation adjustments related to counterparty credit spreads
basis, see Note 4.
and its own credit spreads to determine whether they would
cause the hedging relationship to be ineffective.
Offsetting of Derivative Instruments
Fair Value Hedges—Interest Rate Risk
In connection with its derivative activities, the Firm generally
enters into master netting agreements and collateral
The Firm’s designated fair value hedges consist of interest
agreements with its counterparties. These agreements provide
rate swaps designated as hedges of changes in the benchmark
the Firm with the right, in the event of a default by the
interest rate of certain fixed rate AFS securities and senior
counterparty, to net a counterparty’s rights and obligations
borrowings. The Firm also designates interest rate swaps as
under the agreement and to liquidate and set off cash
fair value hedges of changes in the benchmark interest rate of
collateral against any net amount owed by the counterparty.
certain fixed rate deposits. The Firm is permitted to hedge the
Derivatives with enforceable master netting agreements are
full, or part of the contractual term of the hedged instrument.
reported net of cash collateral received and posted.
The Firm uses regression analysis to perform an ongoing
prospective and retrospective assessment of the effectiveness
However, in certain circumstances, the Firm may not have
of these hedging relationships. For qualifying fair value
such an agreement in place; the relevant insolvency regime
hedges of benchmark interest rates, the change in the fair
may not support the enforceability of the master netting
value of the derivative, offset by the change in the fair value
agreement or collateral agreement; or the Firm may not have
attributable to the change in the benchmark interest rate risk
sought legal advice to support the enforceability of the
of the hedged asset (liability), is recognized in earnings each
agreement. In cases where the Firm has not determined an
period as a component of Interest income (expense). For AFS
agreement to be enforceable, the related amounts are not
securities, the change in fair value of the hedged item due to
offset (see Note 6).
changes other than the risk being hedged will continue to be
reported in OCI. When a derivative is de-designated as a
The Firm’s policy is generally to receive cash and/or
hedge, any basis adjustment remaining on the hedged asset
securities posted as collateral (with rights of rehypothecation)
(liability) is amortized to Interest income (expense) over the
in connection with derivative transactions, irrespective of the
remaining life of the asset (liability) using the effective
enforceability determination regarding the master netting and
interest method.
collateral agreement. In certain cases, the Firm may agree for
such collateral to be posted by the counterparty to a third-
party custodian under a control agreement that enables it to
take control of such collateral in the event of a counterparty
December 2023 Form 10-K 90Table of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Net Investment Hedges unrealized losses are recorded either in OCI or in Other
revenues as described below.
The Firm uses forward foreign exchange contracts to manage
a portion of the currency exposure relating to its net AFS securities in an unrealized loss position are first
investments in foreign operations. To the extent that the evaluated to determine whether there is an intent to sell or it is
notional amounts of the hedging instruments equal the portion more likely than not the Firm will be required to sell before
of the investments being hedged and the underlying exchange recovery of the amortized cost basis. If so, the amortized cost
rate of the derivative hedging instrument is the same as the basis is written down to the fair value of the security such that
exchange rate between the functional currency of the investee the entire unrealized loss is recognized in Other revenues, and
and the intermediate parent entity’s functional currency, it is any previously established ACL is written off.
considered to be perfectly effective. The gain or loss from
revaluing hedges of net investments in foreign operations at For all other AFS securities in an unrealized loss position, any
the spot rate is reported within AOCI. The forward points on portion of unrealized losses representing a credit loss is
the hedging instruments are excluded from hedge recognized in Other revenues and as an increase to the ACL
effectiveness testing and changes in the fair value of this for AFS securities, with the remainder of unrealized losses
excluded component are recorded currently in Interest recognized in OCI. A credit loss exists if the Firm does not
income. expect to recover the amortized cost basis of the security.
When considering whether a credit loss exists, the Firm
Cash Flow Hedges—Interest Rate Risk considers relevant information, including:
The Firm’s designated cash flow hedges consist of interest • guarantees (implicit or explicit) by the U.S. government;
rate derivatives designated as hedges of variability in • the extent to which the fair value has been less than the
forecasted cash flows from floating-rate assets due to changes amortized cost basis;
in the contractually specified interest rates. The Firm uses • adverse conditions specifically related to the security, its
regression analysis to perform an ongoing prospective and industry or geographic area;
retrospective assessment of the effectiveness of these hedging • changes in the financial condition of the issuer of the
relationships. security or, in the case of an asset-backed debt security,
changes in the financial condition of the underlying loan
The objective of this strategy is to hedge the risk of changes obligors;
in the hedged item’s cash flows attributable to changes in the • the payment structure of the debt security and the likelihood
contractually specified interest rate. For qualifying cash flow of the issuer being able to make payments that increase in
hedges of contractually specified interest rates, changes in the the future;
fair value of the derivative are recorded in OCI and • failure of the issuer of the security to make scheduled
subsequently reclassified to earnings in the same periods interest or principal payments;
when the hedged item affects earnings. If cash flow hedge • the current rating and any changes to the rating of the
accounting is discontinued, AOCI is released into earnings security by a rating agency.
immediately if the cash flow of the hedged item is probable of
not occurring. Otherwise the amount in AOCI is released into If a credit loss exists, the Firm measures the credit loss as the
earnings as the forecasted transaction affects earnings. difference between the present value of cash flows expected
to be collected (discounted at the implicit interest rate at
Other Hedges
acquisition of the security or discounted at the effective yield
for securities that incorporate changes in prepayment
In addition to hedges that are designated and qualify for hedge
assumptions) and the amortized cost basis of the security.
accounting, the Firm uses derivatives to economically hedge
Changes in prepayment assumptions alone are not considered
credit risk associated with certain held-for-sale and held-for-
to result in a credit loss. When estimating the present value of
investment corporate loans and lending commitments, and the
expected cash flows, information utilized includes the
related gains and losses are reported within Other revenues in
remaining payment terms of the security, prepayment speeds,
the income statement.
financial condition of the issuer, expected defaults and the
value of any underlying collateral.
For further information on derivative instruments and hedging
activities, see Note 6.
Presentation of ACL and Provision for Credit Losses
AFS Investment Securities Provision for
ACL Credit Losses
AFS securities are reported at fair value in the balance sheet. AFS securities Contra investment securities Other revenue
Interest income, including amortization of premiums and
accretion of discounts, is included in Interest income in the
income statement. Unrealized gains are recorded in OCI, and
91 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Nonaccrual & ACL Charge-offs on AFS Securities product level. Any decreases in fair value below the initial
carrying amount and any recoveries in fair value up to the
AFS securities follow the same nonaccrual and charge-off initial carrying amount are recorded in Other revenues.
guidance as discussed in “Allowance for Credit Losses” Increases in fair value above initial carrying value are not
herein. recognized.
HTM Securities Interest Income. Interest income on loans held for sale is
accrued and recognized based on the contractual rate of
HTM securities are reported at amortized cost, net of any interest. Loan origination fees or costs and purchase price
ACL, in the balance sheet. Refer to “Allowance for Credit discounts or premiums are deferred as an adjustment to the
Losses” herein for guidance on the ACL determination. loan’s cost basis until the related loan is sold and, as such, are
Interest income, including amortization of premiums and included in the periodic determination of the lower of cost or
accretion of discounts on HTM securities, is included in fair value adjustments and the gain or loss recognized at the
Interest income in the income statement. time of sale.
Loans Lending Commitments. Commitments to fund mortgage loans
held for sale are derivatives and are reported in Trading assets
The Firm accounts for loans based on the following
or Trading liabilities in the balance sheet and in Trading
categories: loans held for investment; loans held for sale; and
revenues in the income statement.
loans at fair value.
For commitments to fund non-mortgage loans, the Firm
Nonaccrual and ACL Charge-offs on Loans
records the liability and related expense for the fair value
exposure below cost of such commitments in Other liabilities
All loan categories described below follow the same
and accrued expenses in the balance sheet with an offset to
nonaccrual and charge-off guidance as discussed in
Other revenues in the income statement.
“Allowance for Credit Losses” herein.
Because loans and lending commitments held for sale are
Loans Held for Investment
recognized at the lower of cost or fair value, the allowance for
credit losses and charge-off policies do not apply to these
Loans held for investment are reported at amortized cost,
loans.
which consists of the outstanding principle balance adjusted
for any charge-offs, the allowance for credit losses, any
Loans at Fair Value
unamortized deferred fees or costs for originated loans, and
any unamortized premiums or discounts for purchased loans. Loans for which the fair value option is elected are carried at
fair value and included in Trading assets in the balance sheet,
Interest Income. Interest income on performing loans held for
with changes in fair value recognized in earnings. For further
investment is accrued and recognized as interest income at the
information on loans carried at fair value and classified as
contractual rate of interest. Purchase price discounts or
Trading assets, see Note 4.
premiums, as well as net deferred loan fees or costs, are
amortized into interest income over the life of the loan to Lending Commitments. The Firm records the liability and
produce a level rate of return. related expense for the fair value exposure related to
commitments to fund loans that will be measured at fair
Lending Commitments. The Firm records the liability and value. The liability is recorded in Trading liabilities in the
related expense for the credit exposure related to balance sheet, and the expense is recorded in Trading
commitments to fund loans. The liability is recorded in Other
revenues in the income statement.
Liabilities in the balance sheet and the expense is recorded in
the Provision for credit losses in the income statement. For
Because such loans and lending commitments are reported at
more information regarding loan commitments, standby
fair value, the allowance for credit losses and charge-off
letters of credit and financial guarantees, see Note 14.
policies do not apply to these loans.
For more information regarding allowance for credit losses,
For further information on loans, see Note 9. For more
refer to “Allowance for Credit Losses” herein.
information regarding loan commitments, standby letters of
credit and financial guarantees, see Note 14.
Loans Held for Sale
Allowance for Credit Losses
Loans held for sale are measured at the lower of amortized
cost or fair value, with valuation changes recorded in Other
The ACL for financial instruments measured at amortized
revenues. The Firm determines the valuation allowance on an
cost and certain off-balance sheet exposures (e.g., HFI loans
individual loan basis, except for residential mortgage loans
and lending commitments, HTM securities, customer and
for which the valuation allowance is determined at the loan
other receivables and certain guarantees) represents an
December 2023 Form 10-K 92Table of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
estimate of expected credit losses over the entire life of the generally correspond to external ratings published by S&P.
financial instrument. The Firm also considers transaction structure, including
type of collateral, collateral terms and position of the
Factors considered by management when determining the obligation within the capital structure. In addition, for
ACL include payment status, fair value of collateral and commercial real estate, the Firm considers property type
expected payments of principal and interest, as well as and location, net operating income and LTV ratios, among
internal or external information relating to past events, current other factors, as well as commercial real estate price and
conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts. The credit spread indices and capitalization rates.
Firm uses three forecasts that include assumptions about • Residential real estate loans: Loan origination Fair Isaac
certain macroeconomic variables, including, but not limited Corporation (“FICO”) credit scores as determined by
to, U.S. gross domestic product (“GDP”), equity market independent credit agencies in the U.S. and LTV ratios.
indices and unemployment rates, as well as commercial real • Employee loans: Employment status, which includes those
estate and home price indices. At the conclusion of the Firm’s currently employed by the Firm and for which the Firm can
reasonable and supportable forecast period of 13 quarters, deduct any unpaid amounts due to it through certain
there is a gradual reversion back to historical averages. compensation arrangements; and those no longer employed
by the Firm where such arrangements are no longer
The ACL is measured on a collective basis when similar risk applicable.
characteristics exist for multiple instruments, considering all
available information relevant to assessing the collectability Qualitative and environmental factors such as economic and
of cash flows. Generally, the Firm applies a probability of business conditions, the nature and volume of the portfolio,
default/loss given default model for instruments that are and lending terms and the volume and severity of past due
collectively assessed, under which the ACL is calculated as loans are also considered in the ACL calculations.
the product of probability of default, loss given default and
exposure at default. These parameters are forecast for each Presentation of ACL and Provision for Credit Losses
collective group of assets using a scenario-based statistical
Provision for
model. ACL Credit Losses
Provision for credit
Held for investment loans Contra asset
losses
If the instrument does not share similar risk characteristics
Other instruments measured at
with other instruments, including when it is probable that the amortized cost (e.g., HTM securities Contra asset Other revenues
and customer and other receivables)
Firm will be unable to collect the full payment of principal
Compensation and
Employee loans Contra asset
and interest on the instrument when due, the ACL is measured benefits expenses
on an individual basis. The Firm generally applies a Held for investment lending Other liabilities and Provision for credit
commitments accrued expenses losses
discounted cash flow method for instruments that are
Other off-balance sheet instruments Other liabilities and
Other expenses
individually assessed. (e.g., certain guarantees) accrued expenses
The Firm may also elect to use an approach that considers the Nonaccrual
fair value of the collateral when measuring the ACL if the
loan is collateral dependent (i.e., repayment of the loan is The Firm places financial instruments on nonaccrual status if
expected to be provided substantially by the sale or operation principal or interest is not expected when contractually due or
of the underlying collateral and the borrower is experiencing is past due for a period of 90 days or more unless the
financial difficulty). obligation is well-secured and is in the process of collection.
Additionally, the Firm can elect to use an approach to For any instrument placed on nonaccrual status, the Firm
measure the ACL that considers the fair value of collateral reverses any unpaid interest accrued with an offsetting
where the borrower is required to, and reasonably expected to, reduction to Interest income. Principal and interest payments
continually adjust and replenish the amount of collateral received on nonaccrual instruments are applied to principal if
securing the instrument to reflect changes in the fair value of there is doubt regarding the ultimate collectability of
such collateral. The Firm has elected to use this approach for principal. If collection of the principal is not in doubt, interest
certain securities-based loans, margin loans, securities income is realized on a cash basis. If the instrument is brought
purchased under agreements to resell and securities borrowed. current and neither principal nor interest collection is in
doubt, instruments can generally return to accrual status, and
Credit quality indicators considered in developing the ACL interest income can be recognized.
include:
ACL Charge-offs
• Corporate loans, secured lending facilities, commercial real
The principal balance of a financial instrument is charged off
estate loans and securities, and other loans: Internal risk
in the period it is deemed uncollectible, resulting in a
ratings developed by the CRM that are refreshed at least
reduction in the ACL and in the balance of the financial
annually, and more frequently as necessary. These ratings
instrument in the balance sheet. Accrued interest receivable
93 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
balances that are separately recorded from the related Premises, Equipment and Capitalized Software Costs
financial instruments are charged off against Interest income
when the related financial instrument is placed on nonaccrual Premises, equipment and capitalized software costs consist of
status. Accordingly, the Firm elected not to measure an ACL buildings, leasehold improvements, furniture, fixtures,
for accrued interest receivables. computer and communications equipment, power generation
assets and capitalized software (externally purchased and
Transfers of Financial Assets developed for internal use). Premises, equipment and
capitalized software costs are stated at cost less accumulated
Transfers of financial assets are accounted for as sales when depreciation and amortization and are included in Other assets
the Firm has relinquished control over the transferred assets. in the balance sheet. Depreciation and amortization are
Any related gain or loss on sale is recorded in Net revenues. provided by the straight-line method over the estimated useful
Transfers that are not accounted for as sales are treated as life of the asset.
collateralized financings. Securities borrowed or purchased
under agreements to resell and securities loaned or sold under Estimated Useful Life of Assets
agreements to repurchase are treated as collateralized
in years Estimated Useful Life
financings (see Note 8).
Buildings 39
Leasehold improvements—Building term of lease to 25
Securities purchased under agreements to resell (“reverse
Leasehold improvements—Other term of lease to 15
repurchase agreements”) and Securities sold under
Furniture and fixtures 7
agreements to repurchase (“repurchase agreements”),
Computer and communications equipment 3 to 9
including repurchase and reverse repurchase agreements-to-
Power generation assets 15 to 29
maturity, are carried in the balance sheet at the amount of
Capitalized software costs 2 to 10
cash paid or received plus accrued interest except for certain
reverse repurchase and repurchase agreements for which the Premises, equipment and capitalized software costs are tested
Firm has elected the fair value option (see Note 5). Where for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances
appropriate, repurchase agreements and reverse repurchase suggest that an asset’s carrying value may not be fully
agreements with the same counterparty are reported on a net recoverable.
basis. Securities borrowed and securities loaned are recorded
at the amount of cash collateral advanced or received. Goodwill and Intangible Assets
In instances where the Firm is the lender in securities-for- The Firm tests goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets
securities transactions and is permitted to sell or repledge for impairment on an annual basis and on an interim basis
these securities, the fair value of the collateral received is when certain events or circumstances exist. The Firm tests
reported in Trading assets, and the related obligation to return goodwill for impairment at the reporting unit level, which is
the collateral is reported in Trading liabilities in the balance generally at the level of or one level below the asset's business
sheet. Securities-for-securities transactions where the Firm is segment. The Firm tests indefinite-lived intangible assets for
the borrower are not included in the balance sheet. impairment at the aggregate level of management contracts.
For both the annual and interim tests, the Firm has the option
In order to manage credit exposure arising from these to either (i) perform a quantitative impairment test or (ii) first
transactions, in appropriate circumstances, the Firm enters perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is
into master netting agreements and collateral agreements with more likely than not that the fair value is less than its carrying
its counterparties. These agreements provide the Firm with amount, in which case, the quantitative test would be
the right, in the event of a default by the counterparty, to net a performed.
counterparty’s rights and obligations under the agreement and
to liquidate and set off collateral held by the Firm against the When performing a quantitative impairment test, the Firm
net amount owed by the counterparty. compares the fair value with the carrying amount. If the fair
value is less than the carrying amount, the impairment loss is
The Firm’s policy is generally to take possession of securities equal to the excess of the carrying value over the fair value,
purchased or borrowed in connection with reverse repurchase limited to the carrying amount.
agreements and securities borrowed transactions, respectively,
and to receive cash and/or securities delivered under The estimated fair values are derived based on valuation
repurchase agreements or securities loaned transactions (with techniques the Firm believes market participants would use.
rights of rehypothecation). The estimated fair values are generally determined by
utilizing a discounted cash flow methodology or
For information related to offsetting of certain collateralized methodologies that incorporate price-to-book and price-to-
transactions, see Note 8. earnings multiples of certain comparable companies for
goodwill impairment testing.
December 2023 Form 10-K 94Table of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Intangible assets with a finite life are amortized over their Stock-based awards generally contain clawback and
estimated useful life and are reviewed for impairment on an cancellation provisions. Certain awards provide the Firm
interim basis when impairment indicators are present. discretion to claw back or cancel all or a portion of the award
Impairment losses are recorded within Other expenses in the under specified circumstances. Where award terms are
income statement. considered to be subjective, a grant date cannot be established
and the awards are subject to variable accounting which
Earnings per Common Share requires that compensation expense for those awards is
adjusted for changes in the fair value of the Firm’s common
Basic EPS is computed by dividing earnings available to
stock or the relevant model valuation, as appropriate, until
Morgan Stanley common shareholders by the weighted
conversion, exercise or expiration. Following amendments to
average number of common shares outstanding for the period.
clarify specific subjective award terms in the second quarter
Earnings available to Morgan Stanley common shareholders
of 2023, a grant date for the awards was established such that
represents net income applicable to Morgan Stanley reduced
compensation expense for those awards is no longer adjusted
by preferred stock dividends. Common shares outstanding
for changes in the fair value of the Firm’s common stock. The
include common stock and vested RSUs where recipients
Firm also operates an Employee Stock Purchase Plan
have satisfied the relevant vesting terms. Diluted EPS reflects
(“ESPP”) which allows eligible employees of the Firm to
the assumed conversion of all dilutive securities.
purchase shares of Morgan Stanley at a discount.
Share-based awards that pay dividend equivalents subject to
Employee Stock Trusts
vesting are included in diluted shares outstanding (if dilutive)
under the treasury stock method. In connection with certain stock-based compensation plans,
the Firm has established employee stock trusts to provide, at
The Firm has granted PSUs that vest and convert to shares of
its discretion, common stock voting rights to certain RSU
common stock only if predetermined performance and market
holders. Following the grant of an RSU award, when a stock
goals are satisfied. Since the issuance of the shares is
trust is utilized, the Firm contributes shares to be held in the
contingent upon the satisfaction of certain conditions, the
stock trust until the RSUs convert to common shares. The
PSUs are included in diluted EPS based on the number of
assets of the employee stock trusts are consolidated with those
shares (if any) that would be issuable if the reporting date was
of the Firm and are generally accounted for in a manner
the end of the performance period.
similar to treasury stock, where the shares of common stock
outstanding reported in Common stock issued to employee
For further information on diluted earnings (loss) per
stock trusts are offset by an equal amount reported in
common share, see Note 17 to the financial statements.
Employee stock trusts in the balance sheet.
Deferred Compensation
The Firm uses the grant-date fair value of stock-based
compensation as the basis for recording the movement of the
Stock-Based Compensation
assets to or from the employee stock trusts. Changes in the
The Firm measures compensation expense for stock-based fair value are not recognized as the Firm’s stock-based
awards at fair value. The Firm determines the fair value of compensation must be settled by delivery of a fixed number
RSUs (including PSUs with non-market performance of shares of the Firm’s common stock.
conditions) based on the grant-date fair value of its common
Deferred Cash-Based Compensation
stock, measured as the volume-weighted average price on the
date of grant (“VWAP”). The fair value of RSUs not entitled
Compensation expense for DCP awards is calculated based on
to dividends until conversion is measured at VWAP reduced
the notional value of the award granted, adjusted for changes
by the present value of dividends expected to be paid on the
in the fair value of the referenced investments that employees
underlying shares prior to scheduled conversion date. PSUs
select. Compensation expense is recognized over the vesting
that contain market-based conditions are valued using a
period relevant to each separately vesting portion of deferred
Monte Carlo valuation model.
awards.
Compensation expense is recognized over the vesting period
The Firm invests directly, as a principal, in financial
relevant to each separately vesting portion of the award.
instruments and other investments to economically hedge
Compensation expense for awards with performance
certain of its obligations under its DCP. Changes in the value
conditions is recognized based on the probable outcome of the
of such investments are recorded in Trading revenues and
performance condition at each reporting date. Compensation
Investments revenues. Although changes in compensation
expense for awards with market-based conditions is
expense resulting from changes in the fair value of the
recognized irrespective of the probability of the market
referenced investments will generally be offset by changes in
condition being achieved and is not reversed if the market
the fair value of investments made by the Firm, there is
condition is not met. The Firm accounts for forfeitures as they
typically a timing difference between the immediate
occur.
recognition of gains and losses on the Firm’s investments and
95 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
the deferred recognition of the related compensation expense largest amount of tax benefit that is more likely than not to be
over the vesting period. realized upon ultimate settlement with the related tax
authority. Interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax
Retirement-Eligible Employee Compensation benefits are recognized as a component of the provision for
income taxes.
For year-end stock-based awards and DCP awards anticipated
to be granted to retirement-eligible employees under award Foreign Currencies
terms that do not contain a future service requirement, the
Firm accrues the estimated cost of the awards over the course Assets and liabilities of operations with non-U.S. dollar
of the calendar year preceding the grant date, which reflects functional currencies are translated at year-end rates of
the period over which the compensation is earned. exchange. Gains or losses resulting from translating foreign
currency financial statements, net of hedge gains or losses and
Carried Interest Compensation related tax effects, are reflected in AOCI in the balance sheet.
Gains or losses resulting from remeasurement of foreign
The Firm generally recognizes compensation expense for any
currency transactions are included in net income, and amounts
portion of carried interest (both realized and unrealized) that
recognized in the income statement are translated at the rate
is allocated to employees. For information on performance-
of exchange on the respective date of recognition for each
based fees in the form of carried interest, which are directly
amount.
related to carried interest compensation, see “Revenue
Recognition—Carried Interest” herein. Accounting Updates Adopted in 2023
Income Taxes Fair Value Measurement - Equity Securities Subject to
Contractual Sale Restrictions
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recorded based upon the
temporary differences between the financial statement and The Firm early adopted the Fair Value Measurement of
income tax bases of assets and liabilities using currently Equity Securities Subject to Contractual Sale Restrictions
enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences accounting update on July 1, 2023, with no material impact
are expected to reverse. The effect of a change in tax rates on on the Firm’s financial condition or results of operations upon
deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized in income tax adoption. The update clarifies that a contractual sale
expense (benefit) in the period that includes the enactment restriction is not considered part of the unit of account of an
date. Such effects are recorded in Provision for income taxes equity security and, therefore, is not considered in measuring
regardless of where deferred taxes were originally recorded. fair value.
The Firm recognizes net deferred tax assets to the extent that Financial Instruments - Credit Losses
it believes these assets are more likely than not to be realized.
In making such a determination, the Firm considers all The Firm adopted the Financial Instruments-Credit Losses
available positive and negative evidence, including future accounting update on January 1, 2023, with no impact on the
reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, projected Firm’s financial condition or results of operations upon
future taxable income, tax planning strategies and results of adoption.
recent operations. When performing the assessment, the Firm
considers all types of deferred tax assets in combination with This accounting update eliminates the accounting guidance
each other, regardless of the origin of the underlying for troubled debt restructurings (“TDRs”) and requires new
temporary difference. If a deferred tax asset is determined to disclosures regarding certain modifications of financing
be unrealizable, a valuation allowance is established. If the receivables (i.e., principal forgiveness, interest rate
Firm subsequently determines that it would be able to realize reductions, other-than-insignificant payment delays and term
deferred tax assets in excess of their net recorded amount, it extensions) to borrowers experiencing financial difficulty.
would make an adjustment to the deferred tax asset valuation The update also requires disclosure of current period gross
allowance, which would reduce the provision for income charge-offs by year of origination for financing receivables
taxes. measured at amortized cost. Refer to Note 9, Loans, Lending
Commitments and Related Allowance for Credit Losses, for
The Firm recognizes tax expense associated with Global the new disclosures.
Intangible Low-Taxed Income as it is incurred as part of the
current income taxes to be paid or refunded for the current Accounting Update Adopted in 2022
period.
Reference Rate Reform
Uncertain tax positions are recorded on the basis of a two-step
process, whereby (i) the Firm determines whether it is more The Firm has adopted the Reference Rate Reform accounting
likely than not that the tax positions will be sustained on the update, which extends the period of time entities can utilize
basis of the technical merits of the position and (ii) for those the reference rate reform relief guidance from December 31,
tax positions that meet this threshold, the Firm recognizes the 2022 to December 31, 2024. The relief provides optional
December 2023 Form 10-K 96Table of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
expedients and exceptions for applying generally accepted
At December 31, 2023
accounting principles to contracts, hedging relationships and
$ in millions Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Netting1 Total
other transactions that reference LIBOR or other interest rate
Liabilities at fair value
benchmarks for which the referenced rate is expected to be
Deposits $ — $ 6,439 $ 33 $ — $ 6,472
discontinued or replaced. The Firm is applying the accounting
Trading liabilities:
relief as relevant contract and hedge accounting relationship
U.S. Treasury and
modifications are made during the course of the reference rate agency securities 27,708 16 — — 27,724
reform transition period. There was no impact to the Firm’s Other sovereign
government obligations 26,829 3,955 6 — 30,790
financial statements upon issuance of this accounting standard
Corporate and other debt — 10,560 9 — 10,569
update. Corporate equities3 46,809 300 45 — 47,154
Derivative and other contracts:
3. Cash and Cash Equivalents
Interest rate 8,000 129,983 857 — 138,840
Credit — 10,795 297 — 11,092
At At Foreign exchange 96 89,880 385 — 90,361
December 31, December 31, Equity 2,411 64,794 1,689 — 68,894
$ in millions 2023 2022
Commodity and other 1,642 11,904 1,521 — 15,067
Cash and due from banks $ 7,323 $ 5,409
Netting1 (7,643) (237,497) (1,082) (42,757) (288,979)
Interest bearing deposits with banks 81,909 122,718
Total derivative and other
Total Cash and cash equivalents $ 89,232 $ 128,127 contracts 4,506 69,859 3,667 (42,757) 35,275
Restricted cash $ 30,571 $ 35,380 Total trading liabilities 105,852 84,690 3,727 (42,757) 151,512
Securities sold under
agreements to
For additional information on cash and cash equivalents, repurchase — 571 449 — 1,020
including restricted cash, see Note 2. Other secured financings — 9,807 92 — 9,899
Borrowings — 92,022 1,878 — 93,900
4. Fair Values Total liabilities at fair
value $ 105,852 $ 193,529 $ 6,179 $ (42,757) $ 262,803
Recurring Fair Value Measurements
At December 31, 2022
$ in millions Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Netting1 Total
Assets and Liabilities Measured at Fair Value on a Recurring
Assets at fair value
Basis
Trading assets:
At December 31, 2023 U.S. Treasury and
$ in millions Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Netting1 Total agency securities $ 38,462 $ 42,263 $ 17 $ — $ 80,742
Assets at fair value Other sovereign
government obligations 24,644 4,769 169 — 29,582
Trading assets:
State and municipal
U.S. Treasury and securities — 1,503 145 — 1,648
agency securities $ 56,459 $ 53,741 $ — $ — $ 110,200
MABS — 1,774 416 — 2,190
Other sovereign
government obligations 22,580 9,946 94 — 32,620 Loans and lending
commitments2 — 6,380 2,017 — 8,397
State and municipal
securities — 2,148 34 — 2,182 Corporate and other debt — 23,351 2,096 — 25,447
MABS — 1,540 489 — 2,029 Corporate equities3 97,869 1,019 116 — 99,004
Loans and lending Derivative and other contracts:
commitments2 — 6,122 2,066 — 8,188 Interest rate 4,481 166,392 517 — 171,390
Corporate and other
Credit — 7,876 425 — 8,301
debt — 35,833 1,983 — 37,816
Corporate equities3,5 126,772 929 199 — 127,900 Foreign exchange 49 115,766 183 — 115,998
Derivative and other contracts: Equity 2,778 40,171 406 — 43,355
Interest rate 7,284 140,139 784 — 148,207 Commodity and other 5,609 21,152 3,701 — 30,462
Credit — 10,244 393 — 10,637 Netting1 (9,618) (258,821) (1,078) (55,777) (325,294)
Total derivative and other
Foreign exchange 12 93,218 20 — 93,250 contracts 3,299 92,536 4,154 (55,777) 44,212
Equity 2,169 55,319 587 — 58,075 Investments4 652 685 923 — 2,260
Commodity and other 1,608 11,862 2,811 — 16,281 Physical commodities — 2,379 — — 2,379
Netting1 (7,643) (237,497) (1,082) (42,915) (289,137) Total trading assets4 164,926 176,659 10,053 (55,777) 295,861
Total derivative and other
Investment securities —
contracts 3,430 73,285 3,513 (42,915) 37,313 AFS 53,866 30,396 35 — 84,297
Investments4,5 781 836 949 — 2,566 Securities purchased
Physical commodities — 736 — — 736 under agreements to
resell — 8 — — 8
Total trading assets4 210,022 185,116 9,327 (42,915) 361,550
Total assets at fair value $ 218,792 $ 207,063 $ 10,088 $ (55,777) $ 380,166
Investment securities —
AFS 57,405 30,708 — — 88,113
Securities purchased
under agreements to
resell — 7 — — 7
Total assets at fair value $ 267,427 $ 215,831 $ 9,327 $ (42,915) $ 449,670
97 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Valuation Techniques for Assets and Liabilities Measured
At December 31, 2022
$ in millions Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Netting1 Total at Fair Value on a Recurring Basis
Liabilities at fair value
U.S. Treasury and Agency Securities
Deposits $ — $ 4,776 $ 20 $ — $ 4,796
Trading liabilities: U.S. Treasury Securities
U.S. Treasury and Valuation Technique:
agency securities 20,776 228 — — 21,004
• Fair value is determined using quoted market prices.
Other sovereign
government obligations 23,235 2,688 3 — 25,926 Valuation Hierarchy Classification:
Corporate and other debt — 8,786 29 — 8,815 • Level 1—as inputs are observable and in an active market
Corporate equities3 59,998 518 42 — 60,558 U.S. Agency Securities
Derivative and other contracts: Valuation Techniques:
Interest rate 3,446 161,044 668 — 165,158 • Non-callable agency-issued debt securities are generally
Credit — 7,987 315 — 8,302 valued using quoted market prices, and callable agency-
Foreign exchange 89 113,383 117 — 113,589 issued debt securities are valued by benchmarking model-
Equity 3,266 46,923 1,142 — 51,331 derived prices to quoted market prices and trade data for
Commodity and other 6,187 17,574 2,618 — 26,379
comparable instruments.
Netting1 (9,618) (258,821) (1,078) (57,107) (326,624)
• The fair value of agency mortgage pass-through pool
Total derivative and other
contracts 3,370 88,090 3,782 (57,107) 38,135 securities is model-driven based on spreads of comparable
Total trading liabilities 107,379 100,310 3,856 (57,107) 154,438 to-be-announced securities.
Securities sold under • CMOs are generally valued using quoted market prices
agreements to
repurchase — 352 512 — 864 and trade data adjusted by subsequent changes in related
Other secured financings — 4,459 91 — 4,550 indices for comparable instruments.
Borrowings — 77,133 1,587 — 78,720 Valuation Hierarchy Classification:
Total liabilities at fair • Level 1—on-the-run agency issued debt securities if
value $ 107,379 $ 187,030 $ 6,066 $ (57,107) $ 243,368
actively traded and inputs are observable
MABS—Mortgage- and asset-backed securities • Level 2—all other agency issued debt securities, agency
1. For positions with the same counterparty that cross over the levels of the fair value
hierarchy, both counterparty netting and cash collateral netting are included in the mortgage pass-through pool securities and CMOs if
column titled “Netting.” Positions classified within the same level that are with the actively traded and inputs are observable
same counterparty are netted within that level. For further information on derivative
instruments and hedging activities, see Note 6. • Level 3—in instances where the trading activity is limited
2. For a further breakdown by type, see the following Detail of Loans and Lending or inputs are unobservable
Commitments at Fair Value table.
3. For trading purposes, the Firm holds or sells short equity securities issued by
entities in diverse industries and of varying sizes. Other Sovereign Government Obligations
4. Amounts exclude certain investments that are measured based on NAV per share,
which are not classified in the fair value hierarchy. For additional disclosure about Valuation Techniques:
such investments, see “Net Asset Value Measurements” herein. • Fair value is determined using quoted prices in active
5. At December 31, 2023, the Firm's Trading assets included an insignificant amount
of equity securities subject to contractual sale restrictions that generally prohibit the markets when available. When not available, quoted prices
Firm from selling the security for a period of time as of the measurement date. in less active markets are used. In the absence of position-
specific quoted prices, fair value may be determined
Detail of Loans and Lending Commitments at Fair Value
through benchmarking from comparable instruments.
At At Valuation Hierarchy Classification:
December 31, December 31,
$ in millions 2023 2022 • Level 1—if actively traded and inputs are observable
Secured lending facilities $ — $ 6 • Level 2—if the market is less active or prices are
Commercial real estate 422 528 dispersed
Residential real estate 2,909 2,020 • Level 3—in instances where the prices are unobservable
Securities-based lending and Other loans 4,857 5,843
Total $ 8,188 $ 8,397 State and Municipal Securities
Valuation Techniques:
Unsettled Fair Value of Futures Contracts1 • Fair value is determined using recently executed
transactions, market price quotations or pricing models
At At
December 31, December 31, that factor in, where applicable, interest rates, bond or
$ in millions 2023 2022 CDS spreads, adjusted for any basis difference between
Customer and other receivables, net $ 1,062 $ 1,219 cash and derivative instruments.
Valuation Hierarchy Classification:
1. These contracts are primarily Level 1, actively traded, valued based on quoted
prices from the exchange and are excluded from the previous recurring fair value • Level 2—if value based on observable market data
tables.
supported by market liquidity for comparable instruments
• Level 3—in instances where market data are not
observable or supported by market liquidity
December 2023 Form 10-K 98Table of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Mortgage- and Asset-Backed Securities or borrower types or based on the present value of
Valuation Techniques: expected future cash flows using the Firm’s best available
• Mortgage- and asset-backed securities may be valued estimates of the key assumptions, including forecasted
based on price or spread data obtained from observed credit losses, prepayment rates, forward yield curves and
transactions or independent external parties such as discount rates commensurate with the risks involved or a
vendors or brokers. methodology that utilizes the capital structure and credit
• When position-specific external price data are not spreads of recent comparable securitization transactions.
observable, the fair value determination may require • Fair value of equity margin loans is determined by
benchmarking to comparable instruments, and/or discounting future interest cash flows, net of potential
analyzing expected credit losses, default and recovery losses resulting from large downward price movements of
rates, and/or applying discounted cash flow techniques. the underlying margin loan collateral. The potential losses
When evaluating the comparable instruments for use in the are modeled using the margin loan rate, which is
valuation of each security, security collateral-specific calibrated from market observable CDS spreads, implied
attributes, including payment priority, credit enhancement debt yields or volatility metrics of the loan collateral.
levels, type of collateral, delinquency rates and loss Valuation Hierarchy Classification:
severity, are considered. In addition, for RMBS borrowers, • Level 2—if value based on observable market data
FICO scores and the level of documentation for the loan supported by market liquidity for comparable instruments
are considered. • Level 3—in instances where prices or significant spread
• Market standard cash flow models may be utilized to inputs are unobservable or not supported by market
model the specific collateral composition and cash flow liquidity or if the comparability assessment involves
structure of each transaction. Key inputs to these models significant subjectivity
are market spreads, forecasted credit losses, and default
and prepayment rates for each asset category. Corporate and Other Debt
• Valuation levels of RMBS and CMBS indices are used as Corporate Bonds
an additional data point for benchmarking purposes or to Valuation Techniques:
price outright index positions. • Fair value is determined using recently executed
Valuation Hierarchy Classification: transactions, market price quotations, bond spreads and
• Level 2—if value based on observable market data CDS spreads obtained from independent external parties,
supported by market liquidity for comparable instruments such as vendors and brokers, adjusted for any basis
• Level 3—if external prices or significant spread inputs are difference between cash and derivative instruments.
unobservable or not supported by market liquidity or if the • The spread data used are for the same maturity as the
comparability assessment involves significant subjectivity bond. If the spread data do not reference the issuer, then
related to property type differences, cash flows, data that reference comparable issuers are used. When
performance or other inputs position-specific external price data are not observable,
fair value is determined based on either benchmarking to
Loans and Lending Commitments comparable instruments or cash flow models with yield
Valuation Techniques: curves, bond or single-name CDS spreads and recovery
• Fair value of corporate loans is determined using recently rates or loss given default as significant inputs.
executed transactions, market price quotations (where Valuation Hierarchy Classification:
observable), implied yields from comparable debt, market • Level 2—if value based on observable market data for
observable CDS spread levels obtained from independent comparable instruments
external parties adjusted for any basis difference between • Level 3—in instances where prices or significant spread
cash and derivative instruments, along with proprietary inputs are unobservable or if the comparability assessment
valuation models and default recovery analysis where such involves significant subjectivity
transactions and quotations are unobservable. CDOs
• Fair value of contingent corporate lending commitments is Valuation Techniques:
determined by using executed transactions on comparable • The Firm holds cash CDOs that typically reference a
loans and the anticipated market price based on pricing tranche of an underlying synthetic portfolio of single-name
indications from syndicate banks and customers. The CDS spreads collateralized by corporate bonds (“CLN”) or
valuation of loans and lending commitments also takes cash portfolio of ABS/loans (“asset-backed CDOs”).
into account fee income that is considered an attribute of • Credit correlation, a primary input used to determine the
the contract. fair value of CLNs, is usually unobservable and derived
• Fair value of mortgage loans is determined using using a benchmarking technique. Other model inputs, such
observable prices based on transactional data or third-party as credit spreads, including collateral spreads and interest
pricing for comparable instruments, when available. rates, are typically observable.
• Where position-specific external prices are not observable, • Asset-backed CDOs are valued based on an evaluation of
fair value is estimated based on benchmarking to prices the market and model input parameters sourced from
and rates observed in the primary market for similar loan comparable instruments as indicated by market activity.
99 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Each asset-backed CDO position is evaluated OTC Derivative Contracts
independently taking into consideration available Valuation Techniques:
comparable market levels, underlying collateral • OTC derivative contracts include forward, swap and
performance and pricing, deal structures and liquidity. option contracts related to interest rates, foreign
Valuation Hierarchy Classification: currencies, credit standing of reference entities, equity
• Level 2—when either comparable market transactions are prices or commodity prices.
observable or credit correlation input is insignificant • Depending on the product and the terms of the transaction,
• Level 3—when either comparable market transactions are the fair value of OTC derivative products can be modeled
unobservable or the credit correlation input is significant using a series of techniques, including closed-form
Equity Contracts with Financing Features analytic formulas, such as the Black-Scholes option-
Valuation Techniques: pricing model, simulation models or a combination
• Fair value of certain equity contracts, which are not thereof. Many pricing models do not entail material
classified as OTC derivatives because they do not meet the subjectivity as the methodologies employed do not
net investment criteria, is determined by discounting necessitate significant judgment since model inputs may
future interest cash flows, inclusive of the estimated value be observed from actively quoted markets, as is the case
of the embedded optionality. The valuation uses the same for generic interest rate swaps, many equity, commodity
derivative pricing models and valuation techniques as and foreign currency option contracts, and certain CDS. In
described under “OTC Derivative Contracts” herein. the case of more established derivative products, the
Valuation Hierarchy Classification: pricing models used by the Firm are widely accepted by
• Level 2—when the contract is valued using observable the financial services industry.
inputs or where the unobservable input is not deemed • More complex OTC derivative products are typically less
significant liquid and require more judgment in the implementation of
• Level 3—when the contract is valued using an the valuation technique since direct trading activity or
unobservable input that is deemed significant quotes are unobservable. This includes certain types of
interest rate derivatives with both volatility and correlation
Corporate Equities exposure, equity, commodity or foreign currency
Valuation Techniques: derivatives that are either longer-dated or include exposure
• Exchange-traded equity securities are generally valued to multiple underlyings, and credit derivatives, including
based on quoted prices from the exchange. CDS on certain mortgage- or asset-backed securities and
• Unlisted equity securities are generally valued based on an basket CDS. Where required inputs are unobservable,
assessment of each security, considering rounds of relationships to observable data points, based on historical
financing and third-party transactions, discounted cash and/or implied observations, may be employed as a
flow analyses and market-based information, including technique to estimate the model input values. For further
comparable transactions, trading multiples and changes in information on the valuation techniques for OTC
market outlook, among other factors. derivative products, see Note 2.
• Listed fund units are generally marked to the exchange- Valuation Hierarchy Classification:
traded price if actively traded, or to NAV if not. Unlisted • Level 2—when valued using observable inputs supported
fund units are generally marked to NAV. by market liquidity or where the unobservable input is not
Valuation Hierarchy Classification: deemed significant
• Level 1—actively traded exchange-traded securities and • Level 3—when valued using observable inputs with
fund units limited market liquidity or if an unobservable input is
• Level 2—if not actively traded, inputs are observable or if deemed significant
undergoing a recent M&A event or corporate action
• Level 3—if not actively traded, inputs are unobservable or Investments
if undergoing an aged M&A event or corporate action Valuation Techniques:
• Investments include direct investments in equity securities,
Derivative and Other Contracts as well as various investment management funds, which
Exchange-Traded Derivative Contracts include DCP investments.
Valuation Techniques: • Exchange-traded direct equity investments are generally
• Exchange-traded derivatives that are actively traded are valued based on quoted prices from the exchange.
valued based on quoted prices from the exchange. • For direct investments, initially, the transaction price is
• Exchange-traded derivatives that are not actively traded generally considered by the Firm as the exit price and is its
are valued using the same techniques as those applied to best estimate of fair value.
OTC derivatives as noted below. • After initial recognition, in determining the fair value of
Valuation Hierarchy Classification: non-exchange-traded internally and externally managed
• Level 1—when actively traded funds, the Firm generally considers the NAV of the fund
• Level 2—when not actively traded provided by the fund manager to be the best estimate of
fair value. These investments are included in the Fund
December 2023 Form 10-K 100Table of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Interests table in the “Net Asset Value Measurements” Securities Purchased under Agreements to Resell and
section herein. Securities Sold under Agreements to Repurchase
• For non-exchange-traded investments either held directly Valuation Techniques:
or held within internally managed funds, fair value after • Fair value is computed using a standard cash flow
initial recognition is based on an assessment of each discounting methodology.
underlying investment, considering rounds of financing • The inputs to the valuation include contractual cash flows
and third-party transactions, discounted cash flow analyses and collateral funding spreads, which are the incremental
and market-based information, including comparable Firm spread over the OIS rate for a specific collateral rate (which
transactions, trading multiples and changes in market refers to the rate applicable to a specific type of security
outlook, among other factors. pledged as collateral).
Valuation Hierarchy Classification: Valuation Hierarchy Classification:
• Level 1—if actively traded • Level 2—when the valuation inputs are observable and
• Level 2—when not actively traded and valued based on supported by market liquidity
rounds of financing or third-party transactions • Level 3—in instances where the valuation input is
• Level 3—when not actively traded and rounds of observable but not supported by market liquidity or if an
financing or third-party transactions are not available unobservable input is deemed significant
Physical Commodities Other Secured Financings
Valuation Techniques:. Valuation Techniques:
• Fair value is determined using observable inputs, • Other secured financings are composed of short-dated notes
including broker quotations and published indices. secured by Corporate equities, agreements to repurchase
Valuation Hierarchy Classification: Physical commodities, the liabilities related to sales of
• Level 2—valued using observable inputs Loans and lending commitments accounted for as
financings, and secured contracts that are not classified as
Investment Securities—AFS Securities OTC derivatives because they fail net investment criteria.
Valuation Techniques: For further information on the determination of fair value,
• AFS securities are composed of U.S. government and refer to the Valuation Techniques described herein for the
agency securities (e.g., U.S. Treasury securities, agency- corresponding instruments, which are the collateral
issued debt, agency mortgage pass-through securities and referenced by the other secured financing liability.
CMOs), CMBS, ABS, state and municipal securities. For Valuation Hierarchy Classification:
further information on the determination of fair value, • For further information on the determination of valuation
refer to the corresponding asset/liability Valuation hierarchy classification, see the Valuation Hierarchy
Technique described herein for the same instruments. Classification described herein for the corresponding
Valuation Hierarchy Classification: instruments, which are the collateral referenced by the other
• For further information on the determination of valuation secured financing liability.
hierarchy classification, see the corresponding Valuation
Borrowings
Hierarchy Classification described herein.
Valuation Techniques:
Deposits • The Firm carries certain borrowings at fair value that are
Valuation Techniques: primarily composed of: instruments whose payments and
• The Firm issues FDIC-insured certificates of deposit that redemption values are linked to the performance of a
pay either fixed coupons or that have repayment terms specific index, a basket of stocks, a specific equity security,
linked to the performance of debt or equity securities, a commodity, a credit exposure or basket of credit
indices or currencies. The fair value of these certificates of exposures; and instruments with various interest rate-related
deposit is determined using valuation models that features, including step-ups, step-downs and zero coupons.
incorporate observable inputs referencing identical or Also included are unsecured contracts that are not classified
comparable securities, including prices to which the as OTC derivatives because they fail initial net investment
deposits are linked, interest rate yield curves, option criteria.
volatility and currency rates, equity prices, and the impact • Fair value is determined using valuation models for the
of the Firm’s own credit spreads, adjusted for the impact of derivative and debt portions of the instruments. These
the FDIC insurance, which is based on vanilla deposit models incorporate observable inputs referencing identical
issuance rates. or comparable securities, including prices to which the
Valuation Hierarchy Classification: instruments are linked, interest rate yield curves, option
• Level 2—when valuation inputs are observable volatility and currency rates, and commodity or equity
• Level 3—in instances where an unobservable input is prices.
deemed significant • Independent, external and traded prices are considered, as
well as the impact of the Firm’s own credit spreads, which
are based on observed secondary bond market spreads.
101 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Valuation Hierarchy Classification:
$ in millions 2023 2022 2021
• Level 2—when valued using observable inputs or where the Corporate equities
unobservable input is not deemed significant Beginning balance $ 116 $ 115 $ 86
• Level 3—in instances where an unobservable input is Realized and unrealized gains (losses) 12 (97) (8)
deemed significant Purchases 85 73 121
Sales (41) (22) (50)
Rollforward of Level 3 Assets and Liabilities Measured at Fair
Net transfers 27 47 (34)
Value on a Recurring Basis
Ending balance $ 199 $ 116 $ 115
$ in millions 2023 2022 2021 Unrealized gains (losses) $ 19 $ 11 $ (3)
U.S. Treasury and agency securities
Investments
Beginning balance $ 17 $ 2 $ 9
Beginning balance $ 923 $ 1,125 $ 828
Realized and unrealized gains (losses) — (3) —
Realized and unrealized gains (losses) 35 (409) 382
Purchases — 14 2
Purchases 158 63 226
Sales (10) (1) (9)
Net transfers (7) 5 — Sales (183) (107) (115)
Ending balance $ — $ 17 $ 2 Net transfers 16 251 (196)
Unrealized gains (losses) $ — $ (1) $ — Ending balance $ 949 $ 923 $ 1,125
Other sovereign government obligations Unrealized gains (losses) $ 27 $ (397) $ 359
Beginning balance $ 169 $ 211 $ 268 Investment securities—AFS
Realized and unrealized gains (losses) 5 (5) (1) Beginning balance $ 35 $ — $ 2,804
Purchases 38 116 146 Realized and unrealized gains (losses) — (3) (4)
Sales (86) (107) (192) Sales (32) — (203)
Net transfers (32) (46) (10) Net transfers3 (3) 38 (2,597)
Ending balance $ 94 $ 169 $ 211 Ending balance $ — $ 35 $ —
Unrealized gains (losses) $ 2 $ (14) $ — Unrealized gains (losses) $ — $ (3) $ —
State and municipal securities Securities purchased under agreements to resell
Beginning balance $ 145 $ 13 $ — Beginning balance $ — $ — $ 3
Realized and unrealized gains (losses) — (4) — Net transfers — — (3)
Purchases 9 91 4 Ending balance $ — $ — $ —
Sales (6) (82) (4) Unrealized gains (losses) $ — $ — $ —
Net transfers (114) 127 13 Net derivatives: Interest rate
Ending balance $ 34 $ 145 $ 13 Beginning balance $ (151) $ 708 $ 682
Unrealized gains (losses) $ — $ — $ — Realized and unrealized gains (losses) (336) (643) 284
MABS Purchases 140 1 67
Beginning balance $ 416 $ 344 $ 322 Issuances (43) — (52)
Realized and unrealized gains (losses) (2) (342) 51 Settlements 241 (92) 14
Purchases 232 511 254 Net transfers 76 (125) (287)
Sales (165) (130) (215)
Ending balance $ (73) $ (151) $ 708
Net transfers 8 33 (68)
Unrealized gains (losses) $ (210) $ (327) $ 292
Ending balance $ 489 $ 416 $ 344
Net derivatives: Credit
Unrealized gains (losses) $ (14) $ 2 $ (10)
Beginning balance $ 110 $ 98 $ 49
Loans and lending commitments
Realized and unrealized gains (losses) 5 84 95
Beginning balance $ 2,017 $ 3,806 $ 5,759
Realized and unrealized gains (losses) (189) (80) 51 Purchases — 5 18
Purchases and originations 1,502 793 2,446 Issuances — (10) (46)
Sales (477) (740) (2,609) Settlements (21) (61) 58
Settlements (843) (1,526) (1,268) Net transfers 2 (6) (76)
Net transfers1 56 (236) (573) Ending balance $ 96 $ 110 $ 98
Ending balance $ 2,066 $ 2,017 $ 3,806 Unrealized gains (losses) $ 2 $ 70 $ 122
Unrealized gains (losses) $ (76) $ 29 $ (7) Net derivatives: Foreign exchange
Corporate and other debt Beginning balance $ 66 $ 52 $ 61
Beginning balance $ 2,096 $ 1,973 $ 3,435 Realized and unrealized gains (losses) (290) (8) (89)
Realized and unrealized gains (losses) 145 456 (140) Purchases — 1 2
Purchases and originations 623 1,165 1,355 Issuances (1) — (15)
Sales (664) (1,889) (785) Settlements (15) (46) 16
Settlements (33) (27) —
Net transfers (125) 67 77
Net transfers2 (184) 418 (1,892)
Ending balance $ (365) $ 66 $ 52
Ending balance $ 1,983 $ 2,096 $ 1,973
Unrealized gains (losses) $ (277) $ 43 $ (62)
Unrealized gains (losses) $ (10) $ 160 $ 25
December 2023 Form 10-K 102Table of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
$ in millions 2023 2022 2021 $ in millions 2023 2022 2021
Net derivatives: Equity Borrowings
Beginning balance $ (736) $ (945) $ (2,231) Beginning balance $ 1,587 $ 2,157 $ 4,374
Realized and unrealized gains (losses) (91) 201 344 Realized and unrealized losses (gains) 219 (133) (99)
Purchases 221 77 70 Issuances 708 513 717
Issuances (572) (339) (443) Settlements (391) (285) (448)
Settlements 87 348 160 Net transfers2 (245) (665) (2,387)
Net transfers2 (11) (78) 1,155 Ending balance $ 1,878 $ 1,587 $ 2,157
Ending balance $ (1,102) $ (736) $ (945) Unrealized losses (gains) $ 182 $ (138) $ (114)
Unrealized gains (losses) $ (201) $ 328 $ (103) Portion of unrealized losses (gains) recorded
Net derivatives: Commodity and other in OCI—Change in net DVA 29 (35) (17)
Beginning balance $ 1,083 $ 1,529 $ 1,709 1. Net transfers in 2021 reflect the transfer in the third quarter of $895 million of equity
margin loans from Level 3 to Level 2 as a result of the reduced significance of the
Realized and unrealized gains (losses) 910 315 529 margin loan rate input.
Purchases 78 185 44 2. Net transfers in 2021 reflect the transfer in the second quarter of $2.0 billion of
Corporate and other debt, $1.0 billion of net Equity derivatives and $2.2 billion of
Issuances (136) (210) (86) Borrowings from Level 3 to Level 2 as the unobservable inputs were not significant
Settlements (701) (510) (599) to the overall fair value measurements.
3. Net transfers in 2021 reflect the transfer in the first quarter of $2.5 billion of AFS
Net transfers 56 (226) (68) securities from Level 3 to Level 2 due to increased trading activity and observability
Ending balance $ 1,290 $ 1,083 $ 1,529 of pricing inputs.
Unrealized gains (losses) $ 243 $ (935) $ 141 Level 3 instruments may be hedged with instruments
Deposits classified in Level 1 and Level 2. The realized and unrealized
Beginning balance $ 20 $ 67 $ 126 gains or losses for assets and liabilities within the Level 3
Realized and unrealized losses (gains) 1 — — category presented in the previous tables do not reflect the
Issuances 25 11 — related realized and unrealized gains or losses on hedging
Settlements — (3) (10) instruments that have been classified by the Firm within the
Net transfers (13) (55) (49) Level 1 and/or Level 2 categories.
Ending balance $ 33 $ 20 $ 67
Unrealized losses (gains) $ 1 $ — $ — The unrealized gains (losses) during the period for assets and
Nonderivative trading liabilities liabilities within the Level 3 category may include changes in
Beginning balance $ 74 $ 61 $ 79 fair value during the period that were attributable to both
Realized and unrealized losses (gains) 8 (86) (21) observable and unobservable inputs. Total realized and
Purchases (38) (35) (30) unrealized gains (losses) are primarily included in Trading
Sales 22 93 43 revenues in the income statement.
Net transfers (6) 41 (10)
Ending balance $ 60 $ 74 $ 61 Additionally, in the previous tables, consolidations of VIEs
Unrealized losses (gains) $ 8 $ 17 $ (21) are included in Purchases, and deconsolidations of VIEs are
Securities sold under agreements to repurchase included in Settlements.
Beginning balance $ 512 $ 651 $ 444
Realized and unrealized losses (gains) 2 (8) 1 Significant Unobservable Inputs Used in Recurring and
Issuances 1 17 — Nonrecurring Level 3 Fair Value Measurements
Settlements (9) (22) —
Net transfers (57) (126) 206 Valuation Techniques and Unobservable Inputs
Ending balance $ 449 $ 512 $ 651
Balance / Range (Average1)
Unrealized losses (gains) $ 2 $ — $ 1
$ in millions, except inputs At December 31, 2023 At December 31, 2022
Other secured financings
Assets at Fair Value on a Recurring Basis
Beginning balance $ 91 $ 403 $ 516
Other sovereign
Realized and unrealized losses (gains) 5 (6) (17) government
obligations $ 94 $ 169
Issuances 83 39 449
Comparable pricing:
Settlements (99) (342) (518)
61 to 110 points (87 57 to 124 points (89
Net transfers 12 (3) (27) Bond price points) points)
Ending balance $ 92 $ 91 $ 403 State and municipal
securities $ 34 $ 145
Unrealized losses (gains) $ 5 $ (6) $ (16)
Comparable pricing:
86 to 100 points (97
Bond price N/M points)
MABS $ 489 $ 416
Comparable pricing:
Bond price 0 to 88 points (61 points) 0 to 95 points (68 points)
103 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Balance / Range (Average1) Balance / Range (Average1)
$ in millions, except inputs At December 31, 2023 At December 31, 2022 $ in millions, except inputs At December 31, 2023 At December 31, 2022
Loans and lending Commodity and
commitments $ 2,066 $ 2,017 other $ 1,290 $ 1,083
Margin loan model: Option model:
Margin loan rate 2% to 4% (3%) 2% to 4% (3%) Forward power
price $0 to $220 ($49) per MWh $1 to $292 ($43) per MWh
Comparable pricing:
Commodity volatility 8% to 123% (31%) 12% to 169% (34%)
85 to 102 points (98 87 to 105 points (99
Loan price points) points) Cross-commodity
correlation 54% to 100% (94%) 70% to 100% (94%)
Corporate and
other debt $ 1,983 $ 2,096 Liabilities at Fair Value on a Recurring Basis
Comparable pricing: Securities sold
under agreements
28 to 135 points (82 51 to 132 points (90 to repurchase $ 449 $ 512
Bond price points) points)
Discounted cash flow:
Discounted cash flow:
Loss given default 54% to 84% (62% / 54%) 54% to 84% (62% / 54%) Funding spread 28 to 135 bps (79 bps) 96 to 165 bps (131 bps)
Corporate equities $ 199 $ 116 Other secured
Comparable pricing: financings $ 92 $ 91
Equity price 100% 100% Comparable pricing:
Investments $ 949 $ 923 22 to 101 points (76 23 to 101 points (75
Loan price points) points)
Discounted cash flow:
Borrowings $ 1,878 $ 1,587
WACC 16% to 18% (17%) 15% to 17% (16%)
Option model:
Exit multiple 9 to 17 times (15 times) 7 to 17 times (14 times)
Equity volatility 6% to 69% (13%) 7% to 86% (23%)
Market approach:
Equity volatility
EBITDA multiple 22 times 7 to 21 times (11 times) skew -2% to 0% (0%) -2% to 0% (0%)
Comparable pricing: Equity correlation 41% to 97% (79%) 39% to 98% (86%)
Equity price 24% to 100% (86%) 24% to 100% (89%) Equity - FX
Net derivative and other contracts: correlation -65% to 40% (-30%) -50% to 0% (-21%)
Interest rate $ (73) $ (151) IR curve correlation 50% to 89% (71% / 70%) N/M
Option model: IR - Volatility skew N/M 47% to 136% (74% / 59%)
IR volatility skew 105% to 130% (113% / Discounted cash flow:
70% to 100% (81% / 93%) 109%) Loss given default 54% to 84% (62% / 54%) 54% to 84% (62% / 54%)
IR curve correlation 49% to 99% (77% / 79%) 47% to 100% (80% / 84%) Nonrecurring Fair Value Measurement
Bond volatility 79% to 85% (82% / 85%) N/M Loans $ 4,532 $ 6,610
Inflation volatility 27% to 70% (43% / 39%) 22% to 65% (43% / 38%) Corporate loan model:
IR curve N/M 4% to 5% (5% / 5%) 99 to 1467 bps (1015
Credit $ 96 $ 110 Credit spread bps) 91 to 1276 bps (776 bps)
Credit default swap model: Comparable pricing:
Cash-synthetic 25 to 93 points (70
basis 7 points 7 points Loan price points) 36 to 80 points (65 points)
Warehouse model:
Bond price 0 to 92 points (46 points) 0 to 83 points (43 points) Credit spread 115 to 268 bps (185 bps) 110 to 319 bps (245 bps)
Credit spread 10 to 404 bps (94 bps) 10 to 528 bps (115 bps)
Points—Percentage of par
Funding spread 18 to 590 bps (67 bps) 18 to 590 bps (93 bps)
IR—Interest rate
Foreign exchange2 $ (365) $ 66 FX—Foreign exchange
Option model: 1. A single amount is disclosed for range and average when there is no significant
difference between the minimum, maximum and average. Amounts represent
IR curve -4% to 26% (7% / 5%) -2% to 38% (8% / 4%) weighted averages except where simple averages and the median of the inputs are
Foreign exchange more relevant.
volatility skew -3% to 12% (2% / 0% ) 10% to 10% (10% / 10%) 2. Includes derivative contracts with multiple risks (i.e., hybrid products).
Contingency
The previous table provides information on the valuation
probability 95% 95%
Equity2 $ (1,102) $ (736) techniques, significant unobservable inputs, and the ranges
Option model: and averages for each major category of assets and liabilities
Equity volatility 6% to 97% (23%) 5% to 96% (25%) measured at fair value on a recurring and nonrecurring basis
Equity volatility with a significant Level 3 balance. The level of aggregation
skew -1% to 0% (0%) -4% to 0% (-1%)
and breadth of products cause the range of inputs to be wide
Equity correlation 25% to 97% (49%) 10% to 93% (71%)
and not evenly distributed across the inventory of financial
FX correlation -79% to 40% (-28%) -79% to 65% (-26%)
instruments. Further, the range of unobservable inputs may
IR correlation 10% to 30% (15%) 10% to 30% (14%)
differ across firms in the financial services industry because
of diversity in the types of products included in each firm’s
inventory. Generally, there are no predictable relationships
between multiple significant unobservable inputs attributable
to a given valuation technique.
December 2023 Form 10-K 104Table of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
During 2023, there were no significant revisions made to the • Margin Loan Rate. The annualized rate that reflects the
descriptions of the Firm’s significant unobservable inputs. possibility of losses as a result of movements in the price of
the underlying margin loan collateral. The rate is calibrated
An increase (decrease) to the following significant from the discount rate, credit spreads and/or volatility
unobservable inputs would generally result in a higher (lower) measures.
fair value.
• WACC. WACC represents the theoretical rate of return
• Comparable Bond or Loan Price. A pricing input used required to debt and equity investors. The WACC is used in
when prices for the identical instrument are not available. a discounted cash flow model that calculates the value of
Significant subjectivity may be involved when fair value is the equity. The model assumes that the cash flow
determined using pricing data available for comparable assumptions, including projections, are fully reflected in the
instruments. Valuation using comparable instruments can current equity value, while the debt to equity ratio is held
be done by calculating an implied yield (or spread over a constant.
liquid benchmark) from the price of a comparable bond or
loan, then adjusting that yield (or spread) to derive a value An increase (decrease) to the following significant
for the bond or loan. The adjustment to yield (or spread) unobservable inputs would generally result in an impact to the
should account for relevant differences in the bonds or fair value, but the magnitude and direction of the impact
loans, such as maturity or credit quality. Alternatively, a would depend on whether the Firm is long or short the
price-to-price basis can be assumed between the exposure.
comparable instrument and the bond or loan being valued in
order to establish the value of the bond or loan. • Correlation. A pricing input where the payoff is driven by
more than one underlying risk. Correlation is a measure of
• Comparable Equity Price. A price derived from equity the relationship between the movement of two variables
raises, share buybacks and external bid levels, etc. A (i.e., how the change in one variable influences a change in
discount or premium may be included in the fair value the other variable).
estimate.
• Credit Spread. The credit spread reflects the additional net
• Contingency Probability. Probability associated with the yield an investor can earn from a security with more credit
realization of an underlying event upon which the value of risk relative to one with less credit risk. The credit spread of
an asset is contingent. a particular security is often quoted in relation to the yield
on a credit risk-free benchmark security or reference rate.
• EBITDA Multiple/Exit Multiple. The ratio of enterprise
value to EBITDA, where enterprise value is the aggregate • Interest Rate Curve. The term structure of interest rates
value of equity and debt minus cash and cash equivalents. (relationship between interest rates and the time to
The EBITDA multiple reflects the value of a company in maturity) and a market’s measure of future interest rates at
terms of its full-year EBITDA, whereas the exit multiple the time of observation. An interest rate curve is used to set
reflects the value of a company in terms of its full-year interest rate and foreign exchange derivative cash flows and
expected EBITDA at exit. Either multiple allows is a pricing input used in the discounting of any OTC
comparison between companies from an operational derivative cash flow.
perspective as the effect of capital structure, taxation and
depreciation/amortization is excluded. • Volatility. The measure of variability in possible returns for
an instrument given how much that instrument changes in
An increase (decrease) to the following significant value over time. Volatility is a pricing input for options,
unobservable inputs would generally result in a lower (higher) and, generally, the lower the volatility, the less risky the
fair value. option. The level of volatility used in the valuation of a
particular option depends on a number of factors, including
• Cash-Synthetic Basis. The measure of the price differential the nature of the risk underlying that option, the tenor and
between cash financial instruments and their synthetic the strike price of the option.
derivative-based equivalents. The range disclosed in the
previous table signifies the number of points by which the • Volatility Skew. The measure of the difference in implied
synthetic bond equivalent price is higher than the quoted volatility for options with identical underliers and expiry
price of the underlying cash bonds. dates but with different strikes.
• Funding Spread. The cost of borrowing defined as the
incremental spread over the OIS rate for a specific
collateral rate (which refers to the rate applicable to a
specific type of security pledged as collateral).
• Loss Given Default. Amount expressed as a percentage of
par that is the expected loss when a credit event occurs.
105 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Net Asset Value Measurements Nonrecurring Fair Value Measurements
Fund Interests Assets and Liabilities Measured at Fair Value on a
Nonrecurring Basis
At December 31, 2023 At December 31, 2022
Carrying Carrying At December 31, 2023
$ in millions Value Commitment Value Commitment
$ in millions Level 2 Level 31 Total
Private equity $ 2,685 $ 720 $ 2,622 $ 638
Assets
Real estate 2,765 240 2,642 239
Loans $ 4,215 $ 4,532 $ 8,747
Hedge 74 3 190 3
Other assets—Other investments — 4 4
Total $ 5,524 $ 963 $ 5,454 $ 880
Other assets—ROU assets 23 — 23
Total $ 4,238 $ 4,536 $ 8,774
Amounts in the previous table represent the Firm’s carrying
Liabilities
value of general and limited partnership interests in fund
Other liabilities and accrued
investments, as well as any related performance-based income expenses—Lending commitments $ 110 $ 60 $ 170
in the form of carried interest. The carrying amounts are Total $ 110 $ 60 $ 170
measured based on the NAV of the fund taking into account At December 31, 2022
the distribution terms applicable to the interest held. This $ in millions Level 2 Level 31 Total
same measurement applies whether the fund investments are Assets
accounted for under the equity method or fair value. Loans $ 4,193 $ 6,610 $ 10,803
Other assets—Other investments — 7 7
Private Equity. Funds that pursue multiple strategies, Other assets—ROU assets 4 — 4
including leveraged buyouts, venture capital, infrastructure Total $ 4,197 $ 6,617 $ 10,814
growth capital, distressed investments and mezzanine capital. Liabilities
In addition, the funds may be structured with a focus on Other liabilities and accrued
expenses—Lending commitments $ 275 $ 153 $ 428
specific geographic regions.
Total $ 275 $ 153 $ 428
Real Estate. Funds that invest in real estate assets such as 1. For significant Level 3 balances, refer to “Significant Unobservable Inputs Used in
Recurring and Nonrecurring Level 3 Fair Value Measurements” section herein for
commercial office buildings, retail properties, multifamily details of the significant unobservable inputs used for nonrecurring fair value
residential properties, developments or hotels. In addition, the measurement.
funds may be structured with a focus on specific geographic
Gains (Losses) from Nonrecurring Fair Value
regions. Remeasurements1
Investments in private equity and real estate funds generally
$ in millions 2023 2022 2021
are not redeemable due to the closed-end nature of these Assets
funds. Instead, distributions from each fund will be received Loans2 $ (426) $ (563) $ (89)
as the underlying investments of the funds are disposed and Goodwill — — (8)
monetized. Intangibles — — (3)
Other assets—Other investments3 (15) (14) (57)
Hedge. Funds that pursue various investment strategies, Other assets—Premises, equipment
and software4 (8) (6) (14)
including long-short equity, fixed income/credit, event-driven
Other assets—ROU assets5 (35) (11) (25)
and multi-strategy. Investments in hedge funds may be
Total $ (484) $ (594) $ (196)
subject to initial period lock-up or gate provisions, which
Liabilities
restrict an investor from withdrawing from the fund during a
Other liabilities and accrued expenses
certain initial period or restrict the redemption amount on any —Lending commitments2 $ 75 $ (137) $ 37
redemption date, respectively. Total $ 75 $ (137) $ 37
1. Gains and losses for Loans and Other assets—Other investments are classified in
See Note 14 for information regarding general partner Other revenues. For other items, gains and losses are recorded in Other revenues
if the item is held for sale; otherwise, they are recorded in Other expenses.
guarantees, which include potential obligations to return
2. Nonrecurring changes in the fair value of loans and lending commitments, which
performance fee distributions previously received. See Note exclude the impact of related economic hedges, are calculated as follows: for the
held-for-investment category, based on the value of the underlying collateral; and
22 for information regarding unrealized carried interest at risk
for the held-for-sale category, based on recently executed transactions, market
of reversal. price quotations, valuation models that incorporate market observable inputs where
possible, such as comparable loan or debt prices and CDS spread levels adjusted
for any basis difference between cash and derivative instruments, or default
Nonredeemable Funds by Contractual Maturity recovery analysis where such transactions and quotations are unobservable.
3. Losses related to Other assets—Other investments were determined using
Carrying Value at December 31, 2023 techniques that included discounted cash flow models, methodologies that
incorporate multiples of certain comparable companies and recently executed
$ in millions Private Equity Real Estate transactions.
Less than 5 years $ 1,413 $ 947 4. Losses related to Other assets—Premises, equipment and software generally
include impairments as well as write-offs related to the disposal of certain assets.
5-10 years 1,186 1,778
5. Losses related to Other Assets—ROU assets include impairments related to the
Over 10 years 86 40 discontinued leased properties.
Total $ 2,685 $ 2,765
December 2023 Form 10-K 106Table of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Financial Instruments Not Measured at Fair Value The previous tables exclude all non-financial assets and
liabilities, such as Goodwill and Intangible assets, and certain
At December 31, 2023 financial instruments, such as equity method investments and
Fair Value certain receivables.
Carrying
$ in millions Value Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Financial assets 5. Fair Value Option
Cash and cash equivalents $ 89,232 $ 89,232 $ — $ — $ 89,232
Investment securities— The Firm has elected the fair value option for certain eligible
HTM 66,694 21,937 34,411 1,105 57,453
Securities purchased instruments that are risk managed on a fair value basis to
under agreements to
mitigate income statement volatility caused by measurement
resell 110,733 — 108,099 2,674 110,773
Securities borrowed 121,091 — 121,091 — 121,091 basis differences between the elected instruments and their
Customer and other associated risk management transactions or to eliminate
receivables 74,337 — 70,110 4,031 74,141
complexities of applying certain accounting models.
Loans1,2:
Held for investment 203,385 — 20,125 176,291 196,416
Borrowings Measured at Fair Value on a Recurring Basis
Held for sale 15,255 — 8,652 6,672 15,324
Other assets 704 — 704 — 704 At At
Financial liabilities $ in millions December 31, 2023 December 31, 2022
Deposits $ 345,332 $ — $ 345,391 $ — $ 345,391 Business Unit Responsible for Risk Management
Securities sold under Equity $ 46,073 $ 38,945
agreements to Interest rates 31,055 26,077
repurchase 61,631 — 61,621 — 61,621
Securities loaned 15,057 — 15,055 — 15,055 Commodities 12,798 10,717
Other secured financings 2,756 — 2,756 — 2,756 Credit 2,400 1,564
Customer and other Foreign exchange 1,574 1,417
payables 208,015 — 208,015 — 208,015 Total $ 93,900 $ 78,720
Borrowings 169,832 — 171,009 4 171,013
Commitment
Net Revenues from Borrowings under the Fair Value Option
Amount
Lending commitments3 $ 149,464 $ — $ 1,338 $ 749 $ 2,087
$ in millions 2023 2022 2021
Trading revenues $ (7,991) $ 12,370 $ 899
At December 31, 2022 Interest expense 503 293 305
Fair Value Net revenues1 $ (8,494) $ 12,077 $ 594
Carrying
$ in millions Value Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
1. Amounts do not reflect any gains or losses from related economic hedges.
Financial assets
Cash and cash equivalents $ 128,127 $ 128,127 $ — $ — $ 128,127 Gains (losses) from changes in fair value are recorded in
Investment securities— Trading revenues and are mainly attributable to movements in
HTM 75,634 26,754 37,218 1,034 65,006
the reference price or index, interest rates or foreign exchange
Securities purchased
under agreements to rates.
resell 113,899 — 111,188 2,681 113,869
Securities borrowed 133,374 — 133,370 — 133,370
Gains (Losses) Due to Changes in Instrument-Specific Credit
Customer and other
receivables 73,248 — 69,268 3,664 72,932 Risk
Loans1, 2:
Trading
Held for investment 198,997 — 17,278 173,778 191,056 $ in millions Revenues OCI
Held for sale 14,788 — 6,875 7,783 14,658 2023
Other assets 704 — 704 — 704 Loans and other receivables1 $ (123) $ —
Financial liabilities Lending commitments 14 —
Deposits $ 351,850 $ — $ 351,721 $ — $ 351,721 Deposits — 17
Securities sold under Borrowings (19) (1,726)
agreements to
repurchase 61,670 — 61,620 — 61,620 2022
Securities loaned 15,679 — 15,673 — 15,673 Loans and other receivables1 $ (108) $ —
Other secured financings 3,608 — 3,608 — 3,608 Lending commitments (12) —
Customer and other Deposits — (24)
payables 216,018 — 216,018 — 216,018
Borrowings — 2,006
Borrowings 159,338 — 157,780 4 157,784
2021
Commitment
Amount Loans and other receivables1 $ 278 $ —
Lending commitments3 $ 136,241 $ — $ 1,789 $ 1,077 $ 2,866 Lending commitments 2 —
Deposits — 17
1. Amounts include loans measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis.
2. Loans amounts have been disaggregated into HFI and HFS for the first time in the Borrowings (36) 901
fourth quarter of 2023. Prior period amounts have been revised to match the current
period presentation.
3. Represents Lending commitments accounted for as Held for Investment and Held
for Sale. For a further discussion on lending commitments, see Note 14.
107 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Fair Values of Derivative Contracts
At At
$ in millions December 31, 2023 December 31, 2022
Assets at December 31, 2023
Cumulative pre-tax DVA gain (loss)
recognized in AOCI $ (2,166) $ (457) Bilateral Cleared Exchange-
$ in millions OTC OTC Traded Total
1. Loans and other receivables-specific credit gains (losses) were determined by Designated as accounting hedges
excluding the non-credit components of gains and losses.
Interest rate $ 25 $ — $ — $ 25
Difference between Contractual Principal and Fair Value1 Foreign exchange 5 5 — 10
Total 30 5 — 35
At At Not designated as accounting hedges
$ in millions December 31, 2023 December 31, 2022
Economic hedges of loans
Loans and other receivables2 $ 11,086 $ 11,916
Credit 2 27 — 29
Nonaccrual loans2 8,566 9,128
Other derivatives
Borrowings3 3,030 5,203
Interest rate 127,414 19,914 854 148,182
1. Amounts indicate contractual principal greater than or (less than) fair value. Credit 5,712 4,896 — 10,608
2. The majority of the difference between principal and fair value amounts for loans Foreign exchange 90,654 2,570 16 93,240
and other receivables relates to distressed debt positions purchased at amounts
well below par. Equity 20,338 — 37,737 58,075
3. Excludes borrowings where the repayment of the initial principal amount fluctuates Commodity and other 13,928 — 2,353 16,281
based on changes in a reference price or index.
Total 258,048 27,407 40,960 326,415
The previous tables exclude non-recourse debt from Total gross derivatives $ 258,078 $ 27,412 $ 40,960 $ 326,450
consolidated VIEs, liabilities related to transfers of financial Amounts offset
assets treated as collateralized financings, pledged Counterparty netting (184,553) (23,851) (38,510) (246,914)
commodities and other liabilities that have specified assets Cash collateral netting (39,493) (2,730) — (42,223)
Total in Trading assets $ 34,032 $ 831 $ 2,450 $ 37,313
attributable to them.
Amounts not offset1
Financial instruments collateral (15,690) — — (15,690)
Fair Value Loans on Nonaccrual Status
Net amounts $ 18,342 $ 831 $ 2,450 $ 21,623
At At Net amounts for which master netting or collateral agreements are
$ in millions December 31, 2023 December 31, 2022 not in place or may not be legally enforceable $ 2,641
Nonaccrual loans $ 440 $ 585 Liabilities at December 31, 2023
Nonaccrual loans 90 or more
Bilateral Cleared Exchange-
days past due $ 75 $ 116 $ in millions OTC OTC Traded Total
Designated as accounting hedges
6. Derivative Instruments and Hedging Interest rate $ 467 $ — $ — $ 467
Activities Foreign exchange 414 43 — 457
Total 881 43 — 924
Not designated as accounting hedges
The Firm trades and makes markets globally in listed futures,
Economic hedges of loans
OTC swaps, forwards, options and other derivatives
Credit 43 702 — 745
referencing, among other things, interest rates, equities,
Other derivatives
currencies, investment grade and non-investment grade
Interest rate 120,604 17,179 590 138,373
corporate credits, loans, bonds, U.S. and other sovereign
Credit 5,920 4,427 — 10,347
securities, emerging market bonds and loans, credit indices,
Foreign exchange 87,104 2,694 106 89,904
ABS indices, property indices, mortgage-related and other
Equity 31,545 — 37,349 68,894
ABS, and real estate loan products. The Firm uses these Commodity and other 12,237 — 2,830 15,067
instruments for market-making, managing foreign currency Total 257,453 25,002 40,875 323,330
and credit exposure, and asset/liability management. Total gross derivatives $ 258,334 $ 25,045 $ 40,875 $ 324,254
Amounts offset
The Firm manages its market-making positions by employing Counterparty netting (184,553) (23,851) (38,510) (246,914)
a variety of risk mitigation strategies. These strategies include Cash collateral netting (41,082) (983) — (42,065)
diversification of risk exposures and hedging. Hedging Total in Trading liabilities $ 32,699 $ 211 $ 2,365 $ 35,275
activities consist of the purchase or sale of positions in related Amounts not offset1
securities and financial instruments, including a variety of Financial instruments collateral (6,864) (8) (37) (6,909)
derivative products (e.g., futures, forwards, swaps and Net amounts $ 25,835 $ 203 $ 2,328 $ 28,366
Net amounts for which master netting or collateral agreements are
options). The Firm manages the market risk associated with
not in place or may not be legally enforceable $ 5,911
its market-making activities on a Firmwide basis, on a
worldwide trading division level and on an individual product
basis.
December 2023 Form 10-K 108Table of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Notionals of Derivative Contracts
Assets at December 31, 2022
Bilateral Cleared Exchange-
$ in millions OTC OTC Traded Total Assets at December 31, 2023
Designated as accounting hedges Bilateral Cleared Exchange-
$ in billions OTC OTC Traded Total
Interest rate $ 62 $ 1 $ — $ 63
Designated as accounting hedges
Foreign exchange 15 44 — 59
Interest rate $ — $ 92 $ — $ 92
Total 77 45 — 122
Foreign exchange 1 1 — 2
Not designated as accounting hedges
Total 1 93 — 94
Economic hedges of loans
Not designated as accounting hedges
Credit 2 59 — 61
Economic hedges of loans
Other derivatives
Credit — 1 — 1
Interest rate 141,291 29,007 1,029 171,327
Other derivatives
Credit 5,888 2,352 — 8,240
Interest rate 4,153 8,357 560 13,070
Foreign exchange 113,540 2,337 62 115,939
Credit 214 176 — 390
Equity 16,505 — 26,850 43,355
Foreign exchange 3,378 165 7 3,550
Commodity and other 24,298 — 6,164 30,462
Equity 528 — 440 968
Total 301,524 33,755 34,105 369,384
Commodity and other 142 — 65 207
Total gross derivatives $ 301,601 $ 33,800 $ 34,105 $ 369,506
Total 8,415 8,699 1,072 18,186
Amounts offset
Total gross derivatives $ 8,416 $ 8,792 $ 1,072 $ 18,280
Counterparty netting (214,773) (32,250) (32,212) (279,235)
Cash collateral netting (44,711) (1,348) — (46,059) Liabilities at December 31, 2023
Total in Trading assets $ 42,117 $ 202 $ 1,893 $ 44,212 Bilateral Cleared Exchange-
$ in billions OTC OTC Traded Total
Amounts not offset1
Designated as accounting hedges
Financial instruments collateral (19,406) — — (19,406)
Interest rate $ 3 $ 183 $ — $ 186
Net amounts $ 22,711 $ 202 $ 1,893 $ 24,806
Foreign exchange 14 3 — 17
Net amounts for which master netting or collateral agreements are
not in place or may not be legally enforceable $ 4,318 Total 17 186 — 203
Not designated as accounting hedges
Liabilities at December 31, 2022
Economic hedges of loans
Bilateral Cleared Exchange-
$ in millions OTC OTC Traded Total Credit 2 22 — 24
Designated as accounting hedges Other derivatives
Interest rate $ 457 $ 4 $ — $ 461 Interest rate 4,631 8,197 455 13,283
Foreign exchange 550 101 — 651 Credit 229 155 — 384
Total 1,007 105 — 1,112 Foreign exchange 3,496 167 33 3,696
Not designated as accounting hedges Equity 587 — 712 1,299
Economic hedges of loans Commodity and other 101 — 79 180
Credit 9 368 — 377 Total 9,046 8,541 1,279 18,866
Other derivatives Total gross derivatives $ 9,063 $ 8,727 $ 1,279 $ 19,069
Interest rate 135,661 28,581 455 164,697
Assets at December 31, 2022
Credit 5,535 2,390 — 7,925
Bilateral Cleared Exchange-
Foreign exchange 110,322 2,512 104 112,938 $ in billions OTC OTC Traded Total
Equity 23,138 — 28,193 51,331 Designated as accounting hedges
Commodity and other 19,631 — 6,748 26,379 Interest rate $ 2 $ 62 $ — $ 64
Total 294,296 33,851 35,500 363,647 Foreign exchange 2 2 — 4
Total gross derivatives $ 295,303 $ 33,956 $ 35,500 $ 364,759 Total 4 64 — 68
Amounts offset Not designated as accounting hedges
Counterparty netting (214,773) (32,250) (32,212) (279,235) Economic hedges of loans
Cash collateral netting (45,884) (1,505) — (47,389) Credit — 3 — 3
Total in Trading liabilities $ 34,646 $ 201 $ 3,288 $ 38,135 Other derivatives
Amounts not offset1 Interest rate 3,404 7,609 614 11,627
Financial instruments collateral (2,545) — (1,139) (3,684) Credit 190 130 — 320
Net amounts $ 32,101 $ 201 $ 2,149 $ 34,451 Foreign exchange 3,477 126 15 3,618
Net amounts for which master netting or collateral agreements are Equity 488 — 358 846
not in place or may not be legally enforceable $ 6,430
Commodity and other 141 — 59 200
1. Amounts relate to master netting agreements and collateral agreements that have Total 7,700 7,868 1,046 16,614
been determined by the Firm to be legally enforceable in the event of default but
where certain other criteria are not met in accordance with applicable offsetting Total gross derivatives $ 7,704 $ 7,932 $ 1,046 $ 16,682
accounting guidance.
See Note 4 for information related to the unsettled fair value
of futures contracts not designated as accounting hedges,
which are excluded from the previous tables.
109 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Fair Value Hedges—Hedged Items
Liabilities at December 31, 2022
Bilateral Cleared Exchange- At At
$ in billions OTC OTC Traded Total December 31, December 31,
Designated as accounting hedges $ in millions 2023 2022
Interest rate $ 3 $ 187 $ — $ 190 Investment securities—AFS
Foreign exchange 12 2 — 14 Amortized cost basis currently or previously
hedged $ 47,179 $ 34,073
Total 15 189 — 204
Basis adjustments included in amortized cost1 $ (732) $ (1,628)
Not designated as accounting hedges
Deposits
Economic hedges of loans
Carrying amount currently or previously
Credit — 15 — 15 hedged $ 10,569 $ 3,735
Other derivatives Basis adjustments included in carrying
Interest rate 3,436 7,761 497 11,694 amount1 $ (31) $ (119)
Credit 199 125 — 324 Borrowings
Foreign exchange 3,516 123 35 3,674 Carrying amount currently or previously
hedged $ 158,659 $ 146,025
Equity 488 — 552 1,040
Basis adjustments included in carrying
Commodity and other 101 — 79 180 amount—Outstanding hedges $ (9,219) $ (12,748)
Total 7,740 8,024 1,163 16,927 Basis adjustments included in carrying
amount—Terminated hedges $ (671) $ (715)
Total gross derivatives $ 7,755 $ 8,213 $ 1,163 $ 17,131
1. Hedge accounting basis adjustments are primarily related to outstanding hedges.
The notional amounts of derivative contracts generally
Gains (Losses) on Economic Hedges of Loans
overstate the Firm’s exposure. In most circumstances,
notional amounts are used only as a reference point from $ in millions 2023 2022 2021
which to calculate amounts owed between the parties to the Recognized in Other revenues
contract. Furthermore, notional amounts do not reflect the Credit contracts1 (522) (62) (285)
benefit of legally enforceable netting arrangements or risk 1. Amounts related to hedges of certain held-for-investment and held-for-sale loans.
mitigating transactions.
Derivatives with Credit Risk-Related Contingencies
Gains (Losses) on Accounting Hedges
Net Derivative Liabilities and Collateral Posted
$ in millions 2023 2022 2021
At At
Fair value hedges—Recognized in Interest income December 31, December 31,
Interest rate contracts $ (576) $ 1,928 $ 742 $ in millions 2023 2022
Investment Securities—AFS 638 (1,838) (629) Net derivative liabilities with credit risk-
related contingent features $ 21,957 $ 20,287
Fair value hedges—Recognized in Interest expense
Collateral posted 16,389 12,268
Interest rate contracts $ 3,664 $ (15,159) $ (4,306)
Deposits (88) 124 88
The previous table presents the aggregate fair value of certain
Borrowings (3,564) 15,042 4,214
derivative contracts that contain credit risk-related contingent
Net investment hedges—Foreign exchange contracts
Recognized in OCI $ (168) $ 657 $ 664 features that are in a net liability position for which the Firm
Forward points excluded from hedge has posted collateral in the normal course of business.
effectiveness testing—Recognized in
Interest income 211 (33) (53)
Incremental Collateral and Termination Payments upon
Cash flow hedges—Interest rate contracts1
Potential Future Ratings Downgrade
Recognized in OCI $ 9 $ (4) $ —
Less: Realized gains (losses) (pre-tax) At
reclassified from AOCI to interest income (16) — — December 31,
Net change in cash flow hedges included $ in millions 2023
within AOCI 25 (4) —
One-notch downgrade $ 450
1. For the year ended 2023, there were no forecasted transactions that failed to occur. Two-notch downgrade 394
The net gains (losses) associated with cash flow hedges expected to be reclassified Bilateral downgrade agreements included in the amounts
from AOCI within 12 months as of December 31, 2023 is approximately $(56) above1 $ 692
million. The maximum length of time over which forecasted cash flows are hedged
is 18 months. 1. Amount represents arrangements between the Firm and other parties where upon
the downgrade of one party, the downgraded party must deliver collateral to the
other party. These bilateral downgrade arrangements are used by the Firm to
manage the risk of counterparty downgrades.
The additional collateral or termination payments that may be
called in the event of a future credit rating downgrade vary by
contract and can be based on ratings by Moody’s Investors
Service, Inc., S&P Global Ratings and/or other rating
agencies. The previous table shows the future potential
collateral amounts and termination payments that could be
called or required by counterparties or exchange and clearing
organizations in the event of one-notch or two-notch
December 2023 Form 10-K 110Table of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
downgrade scenarios based on the relevant contractual Protection Purchased with CDS
downgrade triggers.
Notional
At At
Maximum Potential Payout/Notional of Credit Protection December 31, December 31,
Sold1 $ in billions 2023 2022
Single name $ 166 $ 140
Years to Maturity at December 31, 2023 Index and basket 213 173
$ in billions < 1 1-3 3-5 Over 5 Total Tranched index and basket 30 26
Single-name CDS
Total $ 409 $ 339
Investment grade $ 19 $ 29 $ 39 $ 10 $ 97
Fair Value Asset (Liability)
Non-investment grade 7 14 17 1 39
At At
Total $ 26 $ 43 $ 56 $ 11 $ 136
December 31, December 31,
Index and basket CDS $ in millions 2023 2022
Investment grade $ 8 $ 19 $ 85 $ 4 $ 116 Single name $ (2,799) $ (33)
Non-investment grade 8 14 95 17 134 Index and basket (1,208) 1,248
Total $ 16 $ 33 $ 180 $ 21 $ 250 Tranched index and basket (1,012) (217)
Total CDS sold $ 42 $ 76 $ 236 $ 32 $ 386 Total $ (5,019) $ 998
Other credit contracts — — — 3 3
Total credit protection sold $ 42 $ 76 $ 236 $ 35 $ 389 The Firm enters into credit derivatives, principally CDS,
CDS protection sold with identical protection purchased $ 330 under which it receives or provides protection against the risk
of default on a set of debt obligations issued by a specified
Years to Maturity at December 31, 2022
reference entity or entities. A majority of the Firm’s
$ in billions < 1 1-3 3-5 Over 5 Total
Single-name CDS counterparties for these derivatives are banks, broker-dealers,
Investment grade $ 12 $ 29 $ 29 $ 9 $ 79 and insurance and other financial institutions.
Non-investment grade 5 13 16 2 36
Total $ 17 $ 42 $ 45 $ 11 $ 115 The fair value amounts as shown in the previous tables are
Index and basket CDS prior to cash collateral or counterparty netting.
Investment grade $ 3 $ 13 $ 37 $ 3 $ 56
Non-investment grade 8 17 108 19 152 The purchase of credit protection does not represent the sole
Total $ 11 $ 30 $ 145 $ 22 $ 208 manner in which the Firm risk manages its exposure to credit
Total CDS sold $ 28 $ 72 $ 190 $ 33 $ 323 derivatives. The Firm manages its exposure to these
Other credit contracts — — — — — derivative contracts through a variety of risk mitigation
Total credit protection sold $ 28 $ 72 $ 190 $ 33 $ 323 strategies, which include managing the credit and correlation
CDS protection sold with identical protection purchased $ 262 risk across single-name, non-tranched indices and baskets,
tranched indices and baskets, and cash positions. Aggregate
Fair Value Asset (Liability) of Credit Protection Sold1 market risk limits have been established for credit derivatives,
and market risk measures are routinely monitored against
At At
December 31, December 31, these limits. The Firm may also recover amounts on the
$ in millions 2023 2022 underlying reference obligation delivered to the Firm under
Single-name CDS
CDS where credit protection was sold.
Investment grade $ 1,904 $ 762
Non-investment grade 399 (808)
Single-Name CDS. A CDS protects the buyer against the loss
Total $ 2,303 $ (46)
of principal on a bond or loan in case of a default by the
Index and basket CDS
issuer. The protection buyer pays a periodic premium
Investment grade $ 1,929 $ 859
(generally quarterly) over the life of the contract and is
Non-investment grade 45 (1,812)
protected for the period. The Firm, in turn, performs under a
Total $ 1,974 $ (953)
CDS if a credit event as defined under the contract occurs.
Total CDS sold $ 4,277 $ (999)
Other credit contracts 314 (1) Typical credit events include bankruptcy, dissolution or
Total credit protection sold $ 4,591 $ (1,000) insolvency of the referenced entity, failure to pay and
restructuring of the obligations of the referenced entity.
1. Investment grade/non-investment grade determination is based on the internal
credit rating of the reference obligation. Internal credit ratings serve as the CRM’s
assessment of credit risk and the basis for a comprehensive credit limits framework Index and Basket CDS. Index and basket CDS are products
used to control credit risk. The Firm uses quantitative models and judgment to
where credit protection is provided on a portfolio of single-
estimate the various risk parameters related to each obligor.
name CDS. Generally, in the event of a default on one of the
underlying names, the Firm pays a pro rata portion of the total
notional amount of the CDS.
The Firm also enters into tranched index and basket CDS
where credit protection is provided on a particular portion of
the portfolio loss distribution. The most junior tranches cover
initial defaults, and once losses exceed the notional of the
111 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
tranche, they are passed on to the next most senior tranche in Investment Securities in an Unrealized Loss Position
the capital structure.
At December 31, At December 31,
2023 2022
Other Credit Contracts. The Firm has invested in CLNs and Gross Gross
CDOs, which are hybrid instruments containing embedded Fair Unrealized Fair Unrealized
$ in millions Value Losses Value Losses
derivatives, in which credit protection has been sold to the
U.S. Treasury securities
issuer of the note. If there is a credit event of a reference Less than12 months $ 14,295 $ 22 $ 42,144 $ 1,711
entity underlying the instrument, the principal balance of the 12 months or longer 33,458 1,081 11,454 543
note may not be repaid in full to the Firm. Total 47,753 1,103 53,598 2,254
U.S. agency securities
7. Investment Securities Less than12 months 4,297 43 13,662 1,271
12 months or longer 18,459 2,485 7,060 1,482
AFS and HTM Securities Total 22,756 2,528 20,722 2,753
Agency CMBS
At December 31, 2023
Less than12 months — — 5,343 448
Gross Gross
Amortized Unrealized Unrealized Fair 12 months or longer 5,415 456 185 22
$ in millions Cost1 Gains Losses Value Total 5,415 456 5,528 470
AFS securities State and municipal securities
U.S. Treasury securities $ 58,484 $ 24 $ 1,103 57,405 Less than12 months 524 3 2,106 40
U.S. agency securities2 25,852 4 2,528 23,328 12 months or longer 35 2 65 2
Agency CMBS 5,871 — 456 5,415 Total 559 5 2,171 42
State and municipal FFELP student loan ABS
securities 1,132 46 5 1,173
Less than12 months 56 1 627 23
FFELP student loan ABS3 810 — 18 792
12 months or longer 616 17 476 22
Total AFS securities 92,149 74 4,110 88,113
Total 672 18 1,103 45
HTM securities
Total AFS securities in an unrealized loss position
U.S. Treasury securities 23,222 — 1,285 21,937
Less than12 months 19,172 69 63,882 3,493
U.S. agency securities2 40,894 — 7,699 33,195
12 months or longer 57,983 4,041 19,240 2,071
Agency CMBS 1,337 — 121 1,216
Total $ 77,155 $ 4,110 $ 83,122 $ 5,564
Non-agency CMBS 1,241 2 138 1,105
Total HTM securities 66,694 2 9,243 57,453
Total investment securities $ 158,843 $ 76 $ 13,353 $ 145,566 For AFS securities, the Firm believes there are no securities in
an unrealized loss position that have credit losses after
performing the analysis described in Note 2. Additionally, the
At December 31, 2022
Firm does not intend to sell these securities and is not likely to
Gross Gross
Amortized Unrealized Unrealized Fair be required to sell these securities prior to recovery of the
$ in millions Cost1 Gains Losses Value
amortized cost basis. As of December 31, 2023 and December
AFS securities
31, 2022, the securities in an unrealized loss position are
U.S. Treasury securities $ 56,103 $ 17 $ 2,254 $ 53,866
U.S. agency securities2 23,926 1 2,753 21,174 predominantly investment grade.
Agency CMBS 5,998 — 470 5,528
The HTM securities net carrying amounts at December 31,
State and municipal
securities 2,598 71 42 2,627 2023 and December 31, 2022 reflect an ACL of $44 million
FFELP student loan ABS3 1,147 — 45 1,102 and $34 million, respectively, predominantly related to Non-
Total AFS securities 89,772 89 5,564 84,297 agency CMBS. See Note 2 for a description of the ACL
HTM securities methodology used for HTM Securities. As of December 31,
U.S. Treasury securities 28,599 — 1,845 26,754
2023 and December 31, 2022, Non-Agency CMBS HTM
U.S. agency securities2 44,038 — 8,487 35,551
securities were predominantly on accrual status and
Agency CMBS 1,819 — 152 1,667
investment grade.
Non-agency CMBS 1,178 — 144 1,034
Total HTM securities 75,634 — 10,628 65,006
See Note 15 for additional information on securities issued by
Total investment securities $ 165,406 $ 89 $ 16,192 $ 149,303
VIEs, including U.S. agency mortgage-backed securities, non-
1. Amounts are net of any ACL. agency CMBS, and FFELP student loan ABS.
2. U.S. agency securities consist mainly of agency mortgage pass-through pool
securities, CMOs and agency-issued debt.
3. Underlying loans are backed by a guarantee, ultimately from the U.S. Department
of Education, of at least 95% of the principal balance and interest outstanding.
December 2023 Form 10-K 112Table of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Investment Securities by Contractual Maturity
At December 31, 2023
Annualized
At December 31, 2023 Amortized Fair Average
Annualized $ in millions Cost1 Value Yield2
Amortized Fair Average
$ in millions Cost1 Value Yield2,3 HTM securities
AFS securities U.S. Treasury securities:
U.S. Treasury securities: Due within 1 year $ 6,403 $ 6,317 2.1 %
Due within 1 year $ 16,311 $ 16,030 1.2 % After 1 year through 5 years 12,059 11,497 1.8 %
After 1 year through 5 years 40,412 39,620 2.6 % After 5 years through 10 years 3,202 2,965 2.4 %
After 5 years through 10 years 1,761 1,755 4.0 % After 10 years 1,558 1,158 2.3 %
Total 58,484 57,405 Total 23,222 21,937
U.S. agency securities: U.S. agency securities:
Due within 1 year 23 23 (0.6) % After 1 year through 5 years 6 6 1.8 %
After 1 year through 5 years 397 375 1.6 % After 5 years through 10 years 294 276 2.1 %
After 5 years through 10 years 547 504 1.8 % After 10 years 40,594 32,913 1.8 %
After 10 years 24,885 22,426 3.6 % Total 40,894 33,195
Total 25,852 23,328 Agency CMBS:
Agency CMBS: Due within 1 year 30 30 2.5 %
Due within 1 year 1 1 (2.2) % After 1 year through 5 years 1,063 985 1.4 %
After 1 year through 5 years 2,491 2,392 1.8 % After 5 years through 10 years 117 99 1.4 %
After 5 years through 10 years 2,176 2,043 2.0 % After 10 years 127 102 1.6 %
After 10 years 1,203 979 1.4 % Total 1,337 1,216
Total 5,871 5,415 Non-agency CMBS:
State and municipal securities: Due within 1 year 208 185 4.0 %
Due within 1 year 27 28 5.2 % After 1 year through 5 years 343 321 4.6 %
After 1 year through 5 years 185 184 4.7 % After 5 years through 10 years 641 551 3.7 %
After 5 years through 10 years 6 9 4.1 % After 10 years 49 48 5.7 %
After 10 years 914 952 4.2 % Total 1,241 1,105
Total 1,132 1,173 Total HTM securities 66,694 57,453 1.9 %
FFELP student loan ABS: Total investment securities $ 158,843 $ 145,566 2.3 %
After 1 year through 5 years 96 91 6.1 % 1. Amounts are net of any ACL.
After 5 years through 10 years 99 95 6.0 % 2. Annualized average yield is computed using the effective yield, weighted based on
the amortized cost of each security. The effective yield is shown pre-tax and
After 10 years 615 606 6.2 %
excludes the effect of related hedging derivatives.
Total 810 792 3. At December 31, 2023, the annualized average yield, including the interest rate
swap accrual of related hedges, was 1.6% for AFS securities contractually maturing
Total AFS securities 92,149 88,113 2.6 %
within 1 year and 3.6% for all AFS securities.
Gross Realized Gains (Losses) on Sales of AFS Securities
$ in millions 2023 2022 2021
Gross realized gains $ 70 $ 164 $ 237
Gross realized (losses) (21) (94) (27)
Total1 $ 49 $ 70 $ 210
1. Realized gains and losses are recognized in Other revenues in the income
statement.
8. Collateralized Transactions
The Firm enters into securities purchased under agreements to
resell, securities sold under agreements to repurchase,
securities borrowed and securities loaned transactions to,
among other things, acquire securities to cover short positions
and settle other securities obligations, to accommodate
customers’ needs and to finance its inventory positions.
The Firm monitors the fair value of the underlying securities
as compared with the related receivable or payable, including
accrued interest, and, as necessary, requests additional
collateral, as provided under the applicable agreement to
ensure such transactions are adequately collateralized, or
returns excess collateral.
113 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
The risk related to a decline in the market value of collateral For information related to offsetting of derivatives, see Note
pledged or received is managed by setting appropriate market- 6.
based margin requirements. Increases in collateral margin
calls on secured financing due to market value declines may Gross Secured Financing Balances by Remaining
Contractual Maturity
be mitigated by increases in collateral margin calls on
securities purchased under agreements to resell and securities At December 31, 2023
borrowed transactions with similar quality collateral. Overnight Less than 30-90 Over 90
$ in millions and Open 30 Days Days Days Total
Additionally, the Firm may request lower quality collateral Securities sold under
pledged be replaced with higher quality collateral through agreements to
repurchase $ 80,376 $ 114,826 $ 25,510 $ 31,441 $ 252,153
collateral substitution rights in the underlying agreements.
Securities loaned 21,508 1,345 709 12,857 36,419
Total included in the
The Firm actively manages its secured financings in a manner offsetting disclosure $ 101,884 $ 116,171 $ 26,219 $ 44,298 $ 288,572
that reduces the potential refinancing risk of secured Trading liabilities—
Obligation to return
financings of less liquid assets and also considers the quality securities received
as collateral 13,528 — — — 13,528
of collateral when negotiating collateral eligibility with
Total $ 115,412 $ 116,171 $ 26,219 $ 44,298 $ 302,100
counterparties. The Firm utilizes shorter term secured
financing for highly liquid assets and has established longer At December 31, 2022
tenor limits for less liquid assets, for which funding may be at Overnight Less than 30-90 Over 90
$ in millions and Open 30 Days Days Days Total
risk in the event of a market disruption.
Securities sold under
agreements to
Offsetting of Certain Collateralized Transactions repurchase $ 54,551 $ 77,359 $ 20,586 $ 36,486 $ 188,982
Securities loaned 15,150 882 1,984 9,629 27,645
At December 31, 2023 Total included in the
Balance Amounts offsetting disclosure $ 69,701 $ 78,241 $ 22,570 $ 46,115 $ 216,627
Gross Amounts Sheet Net Not Net
$ in millions Amounts Offset Amounts Offset1 Amounts Trading liabilities—
Obligation to return
Assets
securities received as
Securities purchased collateral 22,880 — — — 22,880
under agreements
to resell $ 300,242 $ (189,502) $ 110,740 $ (108,893) $ 1,847 Total $ 92,581 $ 78,241 $ 22,570 $ 46,115 $ 239,507
Securities borrowed 142,453 (21,362) 121,091 (115,969) 5,122
Liabilities Gross Secured Financing Balances by Class of Collateral
Securities sold under Pledged
agreements to
repurchase $ 252,153 $ (189,502) $ 62,651 $ (58,357) $ 4,294 At At
December 31, December 31,
Securities loaned 36,419 (21,362) 15,057 (15,046) 11
$ in millions 2023 2022
Net amounts for which master netting agreements are not in place or may
Securities sold under agreements to repurchase
not be legally enforceable
Securities purchased under agreements to resell $ 1,741 U.S. Treasury and agency securities $ 98,377 $ 57,761
Securities borrowed 607 Other sovereign government obligations 122,342 98,839
Securities sold under agreements to repurchase 3,014 Corporate equities 18,144 19,340
Securities loaned 2 Other 13,290 13,042
Total $ 252,153 $ 188,982
At December 31, 2022 Securities loaned
Balance Amounts
Other sovereign government obligations $ 1,379 $ 862
Gross Amounts Sheet Net Not Net
$ in millions Amounts Offset Amounts Offset1 Amounts Corporate equities 34,434 26,289
Assets Other 606 494
Securities purchased Total $ 36,419 $ 27,645
under agreements
Total included in the offsetting disclosure $ 288,572 $ 216,627
to resell $ 240,355 $ (126,448) $ 113,907 $ (109,902) $ 4,005
Trading liabilities—Obligation to return securities received as collateral
Securities borrowed 145,340 (11,966) 133,374 (128,073) 5,301
Corporate equities $ 13,502 $ 22,833
Liabilities
Other 26 47
Securities sold under
agreements to Total $ 13,528 $ 22,880
repurchase $ 188,982 $ (126,448) $ 62,534 $ (57,395) $ 5,139 Total $ 302,100 $ 239,507
Securities loaned 27,645 (11,966) 15,679 (15,199) 480
Net amounts for which master netting agreements are not in place or may Carrying Value of Assets Loaned or Pledged without
not be legally enforceable
Counterparty Right to Sell or Repledge
Securities purchased under agreements to resell $ 1,696
Securities borrowed 624 At At
Securities sold under agreements to repurchase 3,861 December 31, December 31,
$ in millions 2023 2022
Securities loaned 250
Trading assets $ 37,522 $ 34,524
1. Amounts relate to master netting agreements that have been determined by the
Firm to be legally enforceable in the event of default but where certain other criteria
The Firm pledges certain of its trading assets to collateralize
are not met in accordance with applicable offsetting accounting guidance.
securities sold under agreements to repurchase, securities
December 2023 Form 10-K 114Table of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
loaned, other secured financings and derivatives and to cover Customer Margin and Other Lending
customer short sales. Counterparties may or may not have the At At
December 31, December 31,
right to sell or repledge the collateral.
$ in millions 2023 2022
Margin and other lending $ 45,644 $ 38,524
Pledged financial instruments that can be sold or repledged by
the secured party are identified as Trading assets (pledged to
The Firm provides margin lending arrangements that allow
various parties) in the balance sheet.
customers to borrow against the value of qualifying securities.
Receivables from these arrangements are included within
Fair Value of Collateral Received with Right to Sell or
Customer and other receivables in the balance sheet. Under
Repledge
these arrangements, the Firm receives collateral, which
At At
December 31, December 31, includes U.S. government and agency securities, other
$ in millions 2023 2022 sovereign government obligations, corporate and other debt,
Collateral received with right to sell or repledge $ 735,830 $ 637,941 and corporate equities. Margin loans are collateralized by
Collateral that was sold or repledged1 553,386 486,820
customer-owned securities held by the Firm. The Firm
1. Does not include securities used to meet federal regulations for the Firm’s U.S. monitors required margin levels and established credit terms
broker-dealers.
daily and, pursuant to such guidelines, requires customers to
The Firm receives collateral in the form of securities in deposit additional collateral, or reduce positions, when
connection with securities purchased under agreements to necessary.
resell, securities borrowed, securities-for-securities
Margin loans are extended on a demand basis and generally
transactions, derivative transactions, customer margin loans
are not committed facilities. Factors considered in the review
and securities-based lending. In many cases, the Firm is
of margin loans are the amount of the loan, the intended
permitted to sell or repledge this collateral to secure securities
purpose, the degree of leverage being employed in the
sold under agreements to repurchase, to enter into securities
account and the amount of collateral, as well as an overall
lending and derivative transactions or to deliver to
evaluation of the portfolio to ensure proper diversification or,
counterparties to cover short positions.
in the case of concentrated positions, appropriate liquidity of
Securities Segregated for Regulatory Purposes the underlying collateral or potential hedging strategies to
reduce risk. Underlying collateral for margin loans is
At At
December 31, December 31, reviewed with respect to the liquidity of the proposed
$ in millions 2023 2022 collateral positions, valuation of securities, historic trading
Segregated securities1 $ 20,670 $ 32,254
range, volatility analysis and an evaluation of industry
1. Securities segregated under federal regulations for the Firm’s U.S. broker-dealers concentrations. For these transactions, adherence to the
are sourced from Securities purchased under agreements to resell and Trading
Firm’s collateral policies significantly limits its credit
assets in the balance sheet.
exposure in the event of a customer default. The Firm may
Concentration Based on the Firm’s Total Assets request additional margin collateral from customers, if
At At appropriate, and, if necessary, may sell securities that have
December 31, December 31,
not been paid for or purchase securities sold but not delivered
2023 2022
U.S. government and agency securities and from customers.
other sovereign government obligations
Trading assets1 12 % 9 % Also included in the amounts in the previous table is non-
Off balance sheet—Collateral received2 11 % 12 % purpose securities-based lending on entities in the Wealth
1. Other sovereign government obligations included in Trading assets primarily consist Management business segment.
of obligations of the U.K., Japan and Brazil.
2. Collateral received is primarily related to Securities purchased under agreements to
Other Secured Financings
resell and Securities borrowed.
The Firm is subject to concentration risk by holding large Other secured financings include the liabilities related to
positions in certain types of securities, loans or commitments collateralized notes, transfers of financial assets that are
to purchase securities of a single issuer, including sovereign accounted for as financings rather than sales and consolidated
governments and other entities, issuers located in a particular VIEs where the Firm is deemed to be the primary beneficiary.
country or geographic area, public and private issuers These liabilities are generally payable from the cash flows of
involving developing countries or issuers engaged in a the related assets accounted for as Trading assets (see Notes
particular industry. 13 and 15). Additionally, for certain secured financing
transactions that the Firm entered into during 2023 that meet
Positions taken and underwriting and financing commitments, applicable netting criteria, the Firm offsets Other secured
including those made in connection with the Firm’s private financing liabilities against financing receivables recorded
equity, principal investment and lending activities, often within Trading assets in the amount of $3,472 million at
involve substantial amounts and significant exposure to December 31, 2023.
individual issuers and businesses, including investment grade
and non-investment grade issuers.
115 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
9. Loans, Lending Commitments and Related Loans by Interest Rate Type
Allowance for Credit Losses
At December 31, 2023 At December 31, 2022
Floating or Floating or
The Firm’s held-for-investment and held-for-sale loan Adjustable Adjustable
$ in millions Fixed Rate Rate Fixed Rate Rate
portfolios consist of the following types of loans:
Corporate $ — $ 18,620 $ — $ 17,223
Secured lending facilities — 42,659 — 38,782
• Corporate. Corporate includes revolving lines of credit,
Commercial real estate 141 8,746 204 9,237
term loans and bridge loans made to corporate entities for a
Residential real estate 28,934 31,464 24,903 29,561
variety of purposes. Securities-based lending
• Secured Lending Facilities. Secured lending facilities and Other loans 23,922 65,323 24,077 70,637
include loans provided to clients, which are collateralized Total loans, before ACL $ 52,997 $ 166,812 $ 49,184 $ 165,440
by various assets, including residential and commercial real
See Note 4 for further information regarding Loans and
estate mortgage loans, investor commitments for capital
lending commitments held at fair value. See Note 14 for
calls, corporate loans and other assets.
details of current commitments to lend in the future.
• Commercial Real Estate. Commercial real estate loans
include owner-occupied loans and income-producing loans.
Credit Quality
• Residential Real Estate. Residential real estate loans
mainly include non-conforming loans and HELOC.
The CRM evaluates new obligors before credit transactions
• Securities-based Lending and Other. Securities-based
are initially approved and at least annually thereafter for
lending includes loans that allow clients to borrow money
corporate and commercial real estate loans. For Corporate,
against the value of qualifying securities, generally for any
Secured lending facilities and Other loans, credit evaluations
suitable purpose other than purchasing, trading, or carrying
typically involve the evaluation of financial statements,
securities or refinancing margin debt. The majority of these
assessment of leverage, liquidity, capital strength, asset
loans are structured as revolving lines of credit. Other
composition and quality, market capitalization and access to
primarily includes certain loans originated in the tailored
capital markets, cash flow projections and debt service
lending business within the Wealth Management business
requirements, and the adequacy of collateral, if applicable.
segment.
The CRM also evaluates strategy, market position, industry
Loans by Type dynamics, obligor’s management and other factors that could
affect an obligor’s risk profile.
At December 31, 2023
$ in millions HFI Loans HFS Loans Total Loans
For Commercial real estate loans, the credit evaluation is
Corporate $ 6,758 $ 11,862 $ 18,620
focused on property and transaction metrics, including
Secured lending facilities 39,498 3,161 42,659
Commercial real estate 8,678 209 8,887 property type, LTV ratio, occupancy levels, debt service ratio,
Residential real estate 60,375 22 60,397 prevailing capitalization rates and market dynamics.
Securities-based lending and
Other loans 89,245 1 89,246 For Residential real estate and Securities-based loans, the
Total loans 204,554 15,255 219,809 initial credit evaluation typically includes, but is not limited
ACL (1,169) (1,169)
to, review of the obligor’s income, net worth, liquidity,
Total loans, net $ 203,385 $ 15,255 $ 218,640
collateral, LTV ratio and credit bureau information.
Loans to non-U.S. borrowers, net $ 21,152 $ 5,043 $ 26,195
Subsequent credit monitoring for residential real estate loans
At December 31, 2022 is performed at the portfolio level. Securities-based loan
$ in millions HFI Loans HFS Loans Total Loans collateral values are monitored on an ongoing basis.
Corporate $ 6,589 $ 10,634 $ 17,223
Secured lending facilities 35,606 3,176 38,782 For information related to credit quality indicators considered
Commercial real estate 8,515 926 9,441 in developing the ACL, see Note 2.
Residential real estate 54,460 4 54,464
Securities-based lending and
Other loans 94,666 48 94,714
Total loans 199,836 14,788 214,624
ACL (839) (839)
Total loans, net $ 198,997 $ 14,788 $ 213,785
Loans to non-U.S. borrowers, net $ 17,979 $ 5,672 $ 23,651
December 2023 Form 10-K 116Table of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Loans Held for Investment before Allowance by Origination
At December 31, 2023
Year
Other2
Securities-based
At December 31, 2023 At December 31, 2022 $ in millions Lending1 IG NIG Total
Corporate Revolving $ 71,474 $ 5,230 $ 1,362 $ 78,066
$ in millions IG NIG Total IG NIG Total 2023 1,612 627 346 2,585
Revolving $ 2,350 $ 3,863 $ 6,213 $ 2,554 $ 3,456 $ 6,010 2022 1,128 816 804 2,748
2023 — 88 88 2021 165 330 377 872
2022 — 166 166 6 107 113 2020 — 435 414 849
2021 15 89 104 — 139 139 2019 13 769 628 1,410
2020 29 25 54 — 58 58 Prior 202 1,327 1,186 2,715
2019 — 133 133 — 154 154 Total $ 74,594 $ 9,534 $ 5,117 $ 89,245
Prior — — — 115 — 115 At December 31, 2022
Total $ 2,394 $ 4,364 $ 6,758 $ 2,675 $ 3,914 $ 6,589 Other2
Securities-based
At December 31, 2023 At December 31, 2022 $ in millions Lending1 IG NIG Total
Secured Lending Facilities Revolving $ 77,115 $ 5,760 $ 1,480 $ 84,355
$ in millions IG NIG Total IG NIG Total 2022 1,425 1,572 269 3,266
Revolving $ 9,494 $ 22,240 $ 31,734 $ 9,445 $ 21,243 $ 30,688 2021 725 525 223 1,473
2023 1,535 1,459 2,994 2020 — 580 418 998
2022 392 2,390 2,782 1,135 1,336 2,471 2019 16 913 644 1,573
2021 — 365 365 254 208 462 Prior 202 1,849 950 3,001
2020 — 80 80 — 98 98 Total $ 79,483 $ 11,199 $ 3,984 $ 94,666
2019 60 333 393 60 486 546 IG—Investment Grade
Prior 296 854 1,150 215 1,126 1,341 NIG—Non-investment Grade
1. Securities-based loans are subject to collateral maintenance provisions, and at
Total $ 11,777 $ 27,721 $ 39,498 $ 11,109 $ 24,497 $ 35,606 December 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, these loans are predominantly over-
collateralized. For more information on the ACL methodology related to securities-
At December 31, 2023 At December 31, 2022 based loans, see Note 2.
Commercial Real Estate 2. Other loans primarily include tailored lending. For a further discussion of Other
loans, see “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Risk—Credit Risk”
$ in millions IG NIG Total IG NIG Total herein.
Revolving $ — $ 170 $ 170 $ — $ 204 $ 204
2023 261 1,067 1,328 Past Due Loans Held for Investment before Allowance1
2022 284 1,900 2,184 379 2,201 2,580
$ in millions At December 31, 2023 At December 31, 2022
2021 370 1,494 1,864 239 1,609 1,848
Corporate $ 47 $ 112
2020 — 756 756 — 728 728
Secured lending facilities — 85
2019 195 1,369 1,564 659 1,152 1,811
Commercial real estate 185 —
Prior — 812 812 211 1,133 1,344
Residential real estate 160 158
Total $ 1,110 $ 7,568 $ 8,678 $ 1,488 $ 7,027 $ 8,515
Securities-based lending
and Other loans 1 1
At December 31, 2023
Total $ 393 $ 356
Residential Real Estate
by FICO Scores by LTV Ratio 1. As of December 31, 2023, the majority of the amounts are past due for a period of
$ in millions ≥ 740 680-739 ≤ 679 ≤ 80% > 80% Total less than 90 days. As of December 31, 2022, the majority of the amounts are 90
days or more past due.
Revolving $ 108 $ 33 $ 8 $ 149 $ — $ 149
2023 7,390 1,517 230 8,168 969 9,137 Nonaccrual Loans Held for Investment before Allowance1
2022 10,927 2,424 389 12,650 1,090 13,740
2021 11,075 2,376 239 12,763 927 13,690 $ in millions At December 31, 2023 At December 31, 2022
2020 6,916 1,430 104 8,017 433 8,450 Corporate $ 95 $ 71
2019 3,965 890 131 4,686 300 4,986 Secured lending facilities 87 94
Prior 7,677 2,241 305 9,420 803 10,223 Commercial real estate 426 209
Total $ 48,058 $ 10,911 $ 1,406 $ 55,853 $ 4,522 $ 60,375 Residential real estate 95 118
Securities-based lending
At December 31, 2022 and Other loans 174 10
Residential Real Estate Total $ 877 $ 502
by FICO Scores by LTV Ratio Nonaccrual loans without
an ACL $ 86 $ 117
$ in millions ≥ 740 680-739 ≤ 679 ≤ 80% > 80% Total
Revolving $ 90 $ 29 $ 5 $ 124 $ — $ 124 1. There were no loans held for investment that were 90 days or more past due and
still accruing as of December 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022. For further
2022 11,481 2,533 411 13,276 1,149 14,425
information on the Firm’s nonaccrual policy, see Note 2 to the financial statements.
2021 11,604 2,492 257 13,378 975 14,353
2020 7,292 1,501 115 8,452 456 8,908 The Firm may modify the terms of certain loans for economic
2019 4,208 946 137 4,968 323 5,291 or legal reasons related to a borrower's financial difficulties,
Prior 8,488 2,519 352 10,457 902 11,359 and these modifications include interest rate reductions,
Total $ 43,163 $ 10,020 $ 1,277 $ 50,655 $ 3,805 $ 54,460 principal forgiveness, term extensions and other-than-
insignificant payment delays or a combination of these
117 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
aforementioned modifications. Modified loans are typically Gross Charge-offs by Origination Year
evaluated individually for allowance for credit losses. As of
December 31, 2023, there were no loans held for investment Year Ended December 31, 2023
Secured Residential SBL
modified in the current year with subsequent default.
Lending Real and
$ in millions Corporate Facilities CRE Estate Other Total
Modified Loans Held for Investment Revolving $ (34) $ — $ — $ — $ — $ (34)
2020 — — — — (3) (3)
Modified during the year ended December 31, 20231
2019 — — (85) — (1) (86)
At December 31, 2023
Prior — — (44) — — (44)
$ in millions Amortized Cost % of Total Loans2
Total $ (34) $ — $ (129) $ — $ (4) $ (167)
Term Extension
CRE—Commercial real estate
Corporate $ 183 2.7 %
SBL—Securities-based lending
Commercial real estate 199 2.3 %
Residential real estate 1 0.1 % Allowance for Credit Losses Rollforward and Allocation—
Securities-based lending Loans and Lending Commitments
and Other loans 145 0.2 %
Year Ended December 31, 2023
Total $ 528 Secured SBL
Other-than-insignificant Payment Delay Lending Residential and
$ in millions Corporate Facilities CRE Real Estate Other Total
Securities-based lending
and Other loans $ 71 0.1 % ACL—Loans
Total $ 71 Beginning balance $ 235 $ 153 $ 275 $ 87 $ 89 $ 839
Combination - Multiple Modifications3 Gross charge-offs (34) — (129) — (4) (167)
Commercial real estate $ 24 0.3 % Recoveries 1 — — 1 — 2
Residential real estate 1 — % Net (charge-offs)
recoveries (33) — (129) 1 (4) (165)
Total $ 25
Provision (release) 37 — 314 13 124 488
1. Lending commitments to borrowers for which the Firm modified terms of the Other 2 — 3 (1) 3 7
receivable were $1,062 million as of December 31, 2023.
2. Percentage of total loans represents the percentage of modified loans to total loans Ending balance $ 241 $ 153 $ 463 $ 100 $ 212 $ 1,169
held for investment by loan type. Percent of loans to
3. Combination - Multiple Modifications primarily includes loans with Term extension total loans1 3 % 19 % 4 % 30 % 44 % 100 %
and Other-than-insignificant payment delay.
ACL—Lending commitments
Financial Impact on Modified Loans Held for Investment Beginning balance $ 411 $ 51 $ 15 $ 4 $ 23 $ 504
Provision (release) 16 18 11 — (1) 44
Modified during the year ended December 31, 20231 Other 4 1 — — (2) 3
At December 31, 2023 Ending balance $ 431 $ 70 $ 26 $ 4 $ 20 $ 551
Term Extension Total ending
balance $ 672 $ 223 $ 489 $ 104 $ 232 $ 1,720
Added 1 year, 10 months to the life of the
Corporate modified loan(s)
Added 4 years, 2 months to the life of the Year Ended December 31, 2022
Commercial real estate modified loan(s)
Secured SBL
Residential real estate Added 4 months to the life of the modified loan(s) Lending Residential and
Securities-based lending $ in millions Corporate Facilities CRE Real Estate Other Total
and Other loans Added 7 months to the life of the modified loan(s) ACL—Loans
Other-than-insignificant Payment Delay Beginning balance $ 165 $ 163 $ 206 $ 60 $ 60 $ 654
Securities-based lending Gross charge-offs — (3) (7) — (21) (31)
and Other loans Added 6 months to the life of the modified loan(s) Recoveries 6 — — 1 — 7
Combination - Multiple Modification Net (charge-offs)
Added 7 months of Term extension and 6 months recoveries 6 (3) (7) 1 (21) (24)
of Other-than-insignificant payment delay to the
Provision (release) 65 (6) 80 26 51 216
Commercial real estate life of the modified loan(s)
Other (1) (1) (4) — (1) (7)
Added 10 years of Term extension and reduced
Residential real estate the interest rate by 1% on the modified loan(s) Ending balance $ 235 $ 153 $ 275 $ 87 $ 89 $ 839
1. In instances where more than one loan was modified, modification impact is Percent of loans to
presented on a weighted-average basis. total loans1 3 % 18 % 4 % 27 % 48 % 100 %
ACL—Lending commitments
Past Due Status for Loans Held for Investment Modified in the Beginning balance $ 356 $ 41 $ 20 $ 1 $ 26 $ 444
Last 12 months Provision (release) 59 10 (5) 3 (3) 64
At December 31, 2023 Other (4) — — — — (4)
30-89 Days 90+ Days Ending balance $ 411 $ 51 $ 15 $ 4 $ 23 $ 504
$ in millions Past Due Past Due Total
Total ending
Commercial real estate $ 24 $ 21 $ 45 balance $ 646 $ 204 $ 290 $ 91 $ 112 $ 1,343
Residential real estate — 1 1
Total $ 24 $ 22 $ 46
December 2023 Form 10-K 118Table of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Employee loans are granted in conjunction with a program
Secured SBL established primarily to recruit certain Wealth Management
Lending Residential and
$ in millions Corporate Facilities CRE Real Estate Other Total financial advisors, are full recourse and generally require
ACL—Loans periodic repayments, and are due in full upon termination of
Beginning balance $ 309 $ 198 $ 211 $ 59 $ 58 $ 835 employment with the Firm. These loans are recorded in
Gross charge-offs (23) (67) (27) (1) (8) (126) Customer and other receivables in the balance sheet. See Note
Provision (release) (119) 34 25 1 11 (48) 2 for a description of the CECL allowance methodology,
Other (2) (2) (3) 1 (1) (7) including credit quality indicators, for employee loans.
Ending balance $ 165 $ 163 $ 206 $ 60 $ 60 $ 654
Percent of loans to 10. Goodwill and Intangible Assets
total loans1 3 % 18 % 4 % 25 % 50 % 100 %
ACL—Lending commitments
Beginning balance $ 323 $ 38 $ 11 $ 1 $ 23 $ 396 Goodwill Rollforward
Provision (release) 37 2 10 — 3 52
$ in millions IS WM IM Total
Other (4) 1 (1) — — (4)
At December 31, 2021¹ $ 475 $ 10,325 $ 6,033 $ 16,833
Ending balance $ 356 $ 41 $ 20 $ 1 $ 26 $ 444
Foreign currency (39) (7) (12) (58)
Total ending
balance $ 521 $ 204 $ 226 $ 61 $ 86 $ 1,098 Disposals (7) (116) — (123)
At December 31, 2022¹ $ 429 $ 10,202 $ 6,021 $ 16,652
1. Percent of loans to total loans represents loans held for investment by loan type to
total loans held for investment. Foreign currency (5) 2 7 4
Acquired — — 56 56
The allowance for credit losses for loans and lending
Disposals — (5) — (5)
commitments increased in 2023, primarily related to
At December 31, 2023¹ $ 424 $ 10,199 $ 6,084 $ 16,707
deteriorating conditions in the commercial real estate sector, Accumulated impairments2 $ 673 $ — $ 27 $ 700
including provisions for certain specific loans, mainly in the
1. Balances represent the amount of the Firm’s goodwill after accumulated
office portfolio, and modest growth in certain other loan impairments.
portfolios. Charge-offs in 2023 were primarily related to 2. There were no impairments recorded in 2023, 2022 or 2021.
Commercial real estate and Corporate loans. The base
Intangible Assets Rollforward
scenario used in our ACL models as of December 31, 2023
was generated using a combination of consensus economic $ in millions IS WM IM Total
forecasts, forward rates, and internally developed and At December 31, 2021 $ 104 $ 4,463 $ 3,793 $ 8,360
Acquired 23 41 — 64
validated models, and assumes slow economic growth in
Disposals (75) (106) — (181)
2024, followed by a gradual improvement in 2025. Given the
Amortization expense (16) (483) (111) (610)
nature of our lending portfolio, the most sensitive model input
Other — (4) (11) (15)
is U.S. GDP.
At December 31, 2022 $ 36 $ 3,911 $ 3,671 $ 7,618
Acquired — 9 37 46
See Note 2 for a description of the ACL calculated under the
Disposals — (13) — (13)
CECL methodology, including credit quality indicators, used
Amortization expense (10) (481) (110) (601)
for held-for-investment loans.
Other — 1 4 5
At December 31, 2023 $ 26 $ 3,427 $ 3,602 $ 7,055
Selected Credit Ratios
At At
Intangible Assets by Type
December 31, December 31,
2023 2022
ACL for loans to total HFI loans 0.6 % 0.4 % Non-amortizable Amortizable
Gross Gross
Nonaccrual HFI loans to total HFI loans 0.4 % 0.3 %
Carrying Carrying Accumulated
ACL for loans to nonaccrual HFI loans 133.3 % 167.1 % $ in millions Amount Amount Amortization
At December 31, 2023
Employee Loans Management contracts $ 2,113 $ 245 $ 72
Customer relationships — 8,763 4,582
At At Trade names — 767 187
December 31, December 31,
$ in millions 2023 2022 Other — 14 6
Currently employed by the Firm1 $ 4,257 $ 4,023 Total $ 2,113 $ 9,789 $ 4,847
No longer employed by the Firm2 92 97 At December 31, 2022
Employee loans $ 4,349 $ 4,120 Management contracts 2,110 245 51
ACL (121) (139) Customer relationships — 8,766 4,046
Employee loans, net of ACL $ 4,228 $ 3,981 Trade names — 736 151
Remaining repayment term, weighted Other — 14 5
average in years 5.8 5.8 Total $ 2,110 $ 9,761 $ 4,253
1. These loans are predominantly current.
2. These loans are predominantly past due for a period of 90 days or more.
119 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Intangible Assets Estimated Future Amortization Expense available to unrelated third parties for comparable
transactions.
At
$ in millions December 31, 2023
2024 $ 600 Leases
2025 455
2026 348 The Firm’s leases are principally non-cancelable operating
2027 343
real estate leases.
2028 337
Balance Sheet Amounts Related to Leases
The Firm’s annual goodwill and non-amortizable intangible
asset impairment testing as of July 1, 2023 did not indicate At At
any impairment. For more information, see Note 2. December 31, December 31,
$ in millions 2023 2022
Other assets—ROU assets $ 4,368 $ 4,073
11. Other Assets—Equity Method Investments
Other liabilities and accrued expenses—
and Leases Lease liabilities 5,417 4,901
Weighted average:
Equity Method Investments Remaining lease term, in years 8.7 8.6
Discount rate 4.0 % 3.3 %
At At
December 31, December 31,
$ in millions 2023 2022 Lease Liabilities
Investments $ 1,915 $ 1,927 At At
December 31, December 31,
$ in millions 2023 2022 2021 $ in millions 2023 2022
Income (loss) $ 124 $ 39 $ 104 2023 $ 870
2024 $ 913 785
Equity method investments, other than investments in certain 2025 846 673
fund interests, are summarized above and are included in 2026 774 604
Other assets in the balance sheet with related income or loss 2027 716 548
included in Other revenues in the income statement. See “Net 2028 644 462
Asset Value Measurements—Fund Interests” in Note 4 for the Thereafter 2,637 1,747
Total undiscounted cash flows 6,530 5,689
carrying value of certain of the Firm’s fund interests, which
Imputed interest (1,113) (788)
are composed of general and limited partnership interests, as
Amount on balance sheet $ 5,417 $ 4,901
well as any related carried interest.
Committed leases not yet commenced $ 248 $ 970
Japanese Securities Joint Venture
Lease Costs
$ in millions 2023 2022 2021
Income (loss) from investment in MUMSS $ 129 $ 35 $ 168 $ in millions 2023 2022 2021
Fixed costs $ 938 $ 841 $ 852
Variable costs1 206 170 187
The Firm and Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group, Inc.
Less: Sublease income (10) (7) (6)
(“MUFG”) formed a joint venture in Japan comprising their
Total lease cost, net $ 1,134 $ 1,004 $ 1,033
respective investment banking and securities businesses by
forming two joint venture companies, Mitsubishi UFJ Morgan 1. Includes common area maintenance charges and other variable costs not included
in the measurement of ROU assets and lease liabilities.
Stanley Securities Co., Ltd. (“MUMSS”) and Morgan Stanley
MUFG Securities Co., Ltd. (“MSMS”) (collectively, the Cash Flows Statement Supplemental Information
“Joint Venture”). The Firm owns a 40% economic interest in
$ in millions 2023 2022 2021
the Joint Venture, and MUFG owns the other 60%.
Cash outflows—Lease liabilities $ 892 $ 881 $ 879
Non-cash—ROU assets recorded for new
The Firm’s 40% voting interest in MUMSS is accounted for and modified leases 1,055 544 578
under the equity method within the Institutional Securities
business segment and is included in the equity method Occupancy lease agreements, in addition to base rentals,
investment balances above. The Firm consolidates MSMS generally provide for rent and operating expense escalations
into the Institutional Securities business segment, based on its resulting from increased assessments for real estate taxes and
51% voting interest. other charges.
The Firm engages in transactions in the ordinary course of
business with MUFG and its affiliates; for example,
investment banking, financial advisory, sales and trading,
derivatives, investment management, lending, securitization
and other financial services transactions. Such transactions are
on substantially the same terms as those that would be
December 2023 Form 10-K 120Table of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
12. Deposits 13. Borrowings and Other Secured Financings
Deposits Maturities and Terms of Borrowings
At At Parent Company Subsidiaries At At
December 31, December 31, Fixed Variable Fixed Variable December 31, December 31,
$ in millions 2023 2022 $ in millions Rate1 Rate2 Rate1 Rate2 2023 2022
Savings and demand deposits $ 288,252 $ 319,948 Original maturities of one year or less:
Next 12 months $ — $ — $ 84 $ 3,104 $ 3,188 $ 4,191
Time deposits 63,552 36,698
Original maturities greater than one year:
Total deposits $ 351,804 $ 356,646
2023 $ 18,910
Deposits subject to FDIC insurance $ 276,598 $ 260,420 2024 $ 8,526 $ 389 $ 607 $ 10,629 $ 20,151 29,842
Deposits not subject to FDIC insurance $ 75,206 $ 96,226 2025 18,994 3,036 2,655 10,838 35,523 30,235
2026 23,038 1,478 3,764 7,143 35,423 28,998
Time Deposit Maturities 2027 18,935 347 973 5,083 25,338 23,561
2028 11,058 374 622 9,185 21,239 15,698
At
Thereafter 87,841 2,794 9,392 22,843 122,870 86,623
December 31,
$ in millions 2023 To o t n a e l g y r e e a a r ter than $ 168,392 $ 8,418 $ 18,013 $ 65,721 $ 260,544 $ 233,867
2024 $ 33,649 Total $ 168,392 $ 8,418 $ 18,097 $ 68,825 $ 263,732 $ 238,058
2025 16,220
Weighted average
2026 5,726 coupon at period
end3 3.5 % 6.1 % 5.2 % N/M 3.6 % 3.2 %
2027 3,757
2028 3,708 1. Fixed rate borrowings include instruments with step-up, step-down and zero coupon
features.
Thereafter 492 2. Variable rate borrowings include those that bear interest based on a variety of
Total $ 63,552 indices, including SOFR and federal funds rates, in addition to certain notes carried
at fair value with various payment provisions, including notes linked to the
performance of a specific index, a basket of stocks, a specific equity security, a
Uninsured Non-U.S. Time Deposit Maturities commodity, a credit exposure or basket of credit exposures.
3. Only includes borrowings with original maturities greater than one year. Weighted
At average coupon is calculated utilizing U.S. and non-U.S. dollar interest rates and
December 31, excludes financial instruments for which the fair value option was elected. Virtually
$ in millions 2023 all of the variable rate notes issued by subsidiaries are carried at fair value so a
Less than 3 months $ 1,602 weighted average coupon is not meaningful.
3 - 6 months 540
Borrowings with Original Maturities Greater than One Year
6 - 12 months 381
At At
Over 12 months 48
December 31, December 31,
Total $ 2,571 $ in millions 2023 2022
Senior $ 248,174 $ 221,667
Deposits in U.S. Bank Subsidiaries from Non-U.S. Depositors Subordinated 12,370 12,200
Total $ 260,544 $ 233,867
At December 31, At December 31, Weighted average stated maturity, in years 6.6 6.7
$ in millions 2023 2022
Deposits in U.S. bank subsidiaries
from non-U.S. depositors $ 880 $ 1,220 Certain senior debt securities are denominated in various non-
U.S. dollar currencies and may be structured to provide a
return that is linked to equity, credit, commodity or other
indices (e.g., the consumer price index). Senior debt also may
be structured to be callable by the Firm or extendible at the
option of holders of the senior debt securities.
The Firm’s Borrowings include notes carried and managed on
a fair value basis. These include instruments whose payments
and redemption values are linked to the performance of a
specific index, a basket of stocks, a specific equity security, a
commodity, a credit exposure or basket of credit exposures;
and instruments with various interest rate-related features,
including step-ups, step-downs and zero coupons. Also
included are unsecured contracts that are not classified as
OTC derivatives because they fail initial net investment
criteria. To minimize the exposure from such instruments, the
Firm has entered into various swap contracts and purchased
options that effectively convert the borrowing costs into
floating rates. The swaps and purchased options used to
economically hedge the embedded features are derivatives
and also are carried at fair value. Changes in fair value related
to the notes and economic hedges are reported in Trading
121 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
revenues. See Notes 2 and 5 for further information on Maturities and Terms of Other Secured Financings1
borrowings carried at fair value.
At December 31, 2023 At
Fixed Variable December 31,
Senior Debt Subject to Put Options or Liquidity Obligations $ in millions Rate Rate2 Total 2022
Original maturities of one year or less:
At At
December 31, December 31, Next 12 months $ 8 $ — $ 8 $ 501
$ in millions 2023 2022 Original maturities greater than one year:
Put options embedded in debt agreements $ 1,571 $ 496 2023 $ 5,200
Liquidity obligations1 $ 3,166 $ 2,423 2024 $ — $ 5,085 $ 5,085 343
2025 — 95 95 131
1. Includes obligations to support secondary market trading.
2026 5 87 92 2
Subordinated Debt 2027 — — — —
2023 2022 2028 — 434 434 —
Contractual weighted average coupon 4.3 % 4.1 % Thereafter 7 1,086 1,093 862
Total $ 12 $ 6,787 $ 6,799 $ 6,538
Weighted average
Subordinated debt generally is issued to meet the capital coupon at period-end3 N/M 5.6 % 5.6 % 4.9 %
requirements of the Firm or its regulated subsidiaries and
1. Excludes transfers of assets accounted for as secured financings. See subsequent
primarily is U.S. dollar denominated. Maturities of table.
subordinated debt range from 2025 to 2038. 2. Variable rate other secured financings bear interest based on a variety of indices,
including SOFR and federal funds rates. Amounts include notes carried at fair value
with various payment provisions, including notes linked to equity, credit, commodity
Rates for Borrowings with Original Maturities Greater than or other indices.
3. Includes only other secured financings with original maturities greater than one
One Year
year. Weighted average coupon is calculated utilizing U.S. and non-U.S. dollar
interest rates and excludes other secured financings that are linked to non-interest
At December 31,
indices and for which the fair value option was elected.
2023 2022 2021
Contractual weighted average coupon1 3.6 % 3.2 % 2.7 % Other secured financings include the liabilities related to
Weighted average coupon after swaps 6.5 % 5.1 % 1.6 % collateralized notes, transfers of financial assets that are
accounted for as financings rather than sales and consolidated
1. Weighted average coupon was calculated utilizing U.S. and non-U.S. dollar interest
rates and excludes financial instruments for which the fair value option was elected. VIEs where the Firm is deemed to be the primary beneficiary.
These liabilities are generally payable from the cash flows of
In general, other than securities inventories and customer
the related assets accounted for as Trading assets. See Note 15
balances financed by secured funding sources, the majority of
for further information on other secured financings related to
the Firm’s assets are financed with a combination of deposits,
VIEs and securitization activities.
short-term funding, floating rate long-term debt or fixed rate
long-term debt swapped to a floating rate. The Firm uses
Maturities of Transfers of Assets Accounted for as Secured
interest rate swaps to more closely match these borrowings to Financings1
the duration, holding period and interest rate characteristics of
the assets being funded and to manage interest rate risk. These At At
December 31, December 31,
swaps effectively convert certain of the Firm’s fixed rate $ in millions 2023 2022
borrowings into floating rate obligations. In addition, for non- 2023 $ 987
U.S. dollar currency borrowings that are not used to fund 2024 $ 5,749 4
assets in the same currency, the Firm has entered into 2025 9 60
currency swaps that effectively convert the borrowings into 2026 36 35
U.S. dollar obligations. 2027 21 21
2028 11 —
The Firm’s use of swaps for asset and liability management Thereafter 22 12
affects its effective average borrowing rate. Total $ 5,848 $ 1,119
1. Excludes Securities sold under agreements to repurchase and Securities loaned.
Other Secured Financings
For transfers of assets that fail to meet accounting criteria for
At At a sale, the Firm continues to record the assets and recognizes
December 31, December 31,
$ in millions 2023 2022 the associated liabilities in the balance sheet.
Original maturities:
One year or less $ 5,732 $ 944
Greater than one year 6,923 7,214
Total $ 12,655 $ 8,158
Transfers of assets accounted for as
secured financings 5,848 1,119
December 2023 Form 10-K 122Table of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
14. Commitments, Guarantees and Underwriting Commitments. The Firm provides underwriting
Contingencies commitments in connection with its capital raising sources to
a diverse group of corporate and other institutional clients.
Commitments
Investment Activities. The Firm sponsors several non-
Years to Maturity at December 31, 2023 consolidated investment management funds for third-party
Less investors where it typically acts as general partner of, and
$ in millions than 1 1-3 3-5 Over 5 Total
investment adviser to, these funds and typically commits to
Lending:
invest a minority of the capital of such funds, with
Corporate $ 17,036 $ 36,214 $ 54,411 $ 1,134 $ 108,795
Secured lending subscribing third-party investors contributing the majority.
facilities 8,043 5,936 3,466 2,424 19,869 The Firm has contractual capital commitments, guarantees
Commercial and
and counterparty arrangements with respect to these
Residential real
estate 217 28 28 352 625 investment management funds.
Securities-based
lending and Other 16,483 3,488 319 394 20,684
Letters of Credit and Other Financial Guarantees. The Firm
Forward-starting secured
financing receivables1 60,261 — — — 60,261 has outstanding letters of credit and other financial guarantees
Central counterparty 300 — — 14,910 15,210 issued by third-party banks to certain of the Firm’s
Investment activities 1,659 119 80 551 2,409 counterparties. The Firm is contingently liable for these letters
Letters of credit and of credit and other financial guarantees, which are primarily
other financial
guarantees 51 17 — 6 74 used to provide collateral for securities and commodities
Total $ 104,050 $ 45,802 $ 58,304 $ 19,771 $ 227,927 traded and to satisfy various margin requirements in lieu of
Lending commitments participated to third parties $ 7,213 depositing cash or securities with these counterparties.
1. Forward-starting secured financing receivables are generally settled within three
business days. Guarantees
Since commitments associated with these instruments may
At December 31, 2023
expire unused, the amounts shown do not necessarily reflect
Maximum Potential Payout/Notional of Carrying
the actual future cash funding requirements. Obligations by Years to Maturity Amount
Less Asset
$ in millions than 1 1-3 3-5 Over 5 (Liability)
Types of Commitments Non-credit derivatives1 1,546,134 1,342,622 268,865 777,285 (44,539)
Standby letters of credit
Lending Commitments. Lending commitments primarily and other financial
guarantees issued2 1,495 977 1,322 2,688 (2)
represent the notional amount of legally binding obligations to Market value guarantees 1 — — — —
provide funding to clients for different types of loan Liquidity facilities 2,092 — — — (1)
transactions. For syndications that are led by the Firm, the Whole loan sales
guarantees — 77 10 23,075 —
lending commitments accepted by the borrower but not yet
Securitization
closed are net of the amounts agreed to by counterparties that representations and
warranties3 — — — 80,667 (3)
will participate in the syndication. For syndications that the
General partner guarantees 398 32 139 24 (89)
Firm participates in and does not lead, lending commitments
Client clearing guarantees 228 — — — —
accepted by the borrower but not yet closed include only the
amount that the Firm expects it will be allocated from the lead 1. The carrying amounts of derivative contracts that meet the accounting definition of
a guarantee are shown on a gross basis. For further information on derivative
syndicate bank. Due to the nature of the Firm’s obligations contracts, see Note 6.
under the commitments, these amounts include certain 2. These amounts include certain issued standby letters of credit participated to third
parties, totaling $0.9 billion of notional and collateral/recourse, due to the nature of
commitments participated to third parties. the Firm’s obligations under these arrangements. As of December 31, 2023, the
carrying amount of standby letters of credit and other financial guarantees issued
includes an allowance for credit losses of $70 million.
Forward-Starting Secured Financing Receivables. This 3. Related to commercial and residential mortgage securitizations.
amount includes securities purchased under agreements to
Types of Guarantees
resell and securities borrowed that the Firm has entered into
prior to the balance sheet date that will settle after the balance
Non-Credit Derivatives. Certain derivative contracts meet the
sheet date. These transactions are primarily secured by
accounting definition of a guarantee, including certain written
collateral from U.S. government agency securities and other
options, contingent-forward contracts and CDS (see Note 6
sovereign government obligations when they are funded.
regarding credit derivatives in which the Firm has sold credit
protection to the counterparty which are excluded from the
Central Counterparty. These commitments relate to the
previous table). For non-credit derivative contracts that meet
Firm’s membership in certain clearinghouses and are
the accounting definition of a guarantee the notional amount
contingent upon the default of a clearinghouse member or
is used as the maximum potential payout for certain derivative
other stress events.
contracts, such as written interest rate caps and written foreign
currency options. The Firm evaluates collateral requirements
for all derivatives, including derivatives that do not meet the
123 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
accounting definition of a guarantee. For the effects of cash the current UPB of those loans, and, accordingly, the amount
collateral and counterparty netting, see Note 6. included in the previous table represents the UPB at the time
of the whole loan sale or at the time when the Firm last
In certain situations, collateral may be held by the Firm for serviced any of those loans. The current UPB balances could
those contracts that meet the definition of a guarantee. be substantially lower than the maximum potential payout
Generally, the Firm sets collateral requirements by amount included in the previous table. The related liability
counterparty so that the collateral covers various transactions primarily relates to sales of loans to the federal mortgage
and products and is not allocated specifically to individual agencies.
contracts. Also, the Firm may recover amounts related to the
underlying asset delivered to the Firm under the derivative Securitization Representations and Warranties. As part of the
contract. Firm’s Institutional Securities business segment’s
securitizations and related activities, the Firm has provided, or
Standby Letters of Credit and Other Financial Guarantees otherwise agreed to be responsible for, representations and
Issued. Generally, in connection with its lending businesses, warranties regarding certain assets transferred in
the Firm provides standby letters of credit and other financial securitization transactions sponsored by the Firm. The extent
guarantees to counterparties. Such arrangements represent and nature of the representations and warranties, if any, vary
obligations to make payments to third parties if the among different securitizations. Under certain circumstances,
counterparty fails to fulfill its obligation under a borrowing the Firm may be required to repurchase certain assets or make
arrangement or other contractual obligation. A majority of the other payments related to such assets if such representations
Firm’s standby letters of credit are provided on behalf of and warranties are breached. The maximum potential amount
counterparties that are investment grade. If the counterparty of future payments the Firm could be required to make would
fails to fulfill its contractual obligation, the Firm has access to be equal to the current outstanding balances of, or losses
collateral or recourse that would approximate its obligation. associated with, the assets subject to breaches of such
representations and warranties. The amount included in the
Market Value Guarantees. Market value guarantees are issued
previous table for the maximum potential payout includes the
to guarantee timely payment of a specified return to investors
current UPB or historical losses where known and the UPB at
in certain affordable housing tax credit funds. These
the time of sale when the current UPB is not known.
guarantees are designed to return an investor’s contribution to
a fund and the investor’s share of tax losses and tax credits General Partner Guarantees. As a general partner in certain
expected to be generated by a fund. investment management funds, the Firm receives certain
distributions from the partnerships when the return exceeds
Liquidity Facilities. The Firm has entered into liquidity
specified performance targets according to the provisions of
facilities with SPEs and other counterparties, whereby the
the partnership agreements. The Firm may be required to
Firm is required to make certain payments if losses or defaults
return all or a portion of such distributions to the limited
occur. Primarily, the Firm acts as liquidity provider to
partners in the event the limited partners do not achieve a
municipal bond securitization SPEs and for stand-alone
certain return as specified in the various partnership
municipal bonds in which the holders of beneficial interests
agreements, subject to certain limitations.
issued by these SPEs or the holders of the individual bonds,
respectively, have the right to tender their interests for Client Clearing Guarantees. The Firm is a sponsoring
purchase by the Firm on specified dates at a specified price. member of the Government Securities Division of the FICC's
The Firm often may have recourse to the underlying assets Sponsored Clearing Model. Clients of the Firm, as sponsored
held by the SPEs in the event payments are required under members, can transact in overnight and term securities
such liquidity facilities, as well as make-whole or recourse repurchase and resale agreements, which are cleared through
provisions with the trust sponsors. The recourse amount often the FICC. As sponsoring member, the Firm guarantees to the
exceeds the maximum potential payout amount of the FICC the prompt and full payment and performance of its
guarantee. Substantially all of the underlying assets in the clients’ obligations. In 2020, the FICC’s sponsored clearing
SPEs are investment grade. Liquidity facilities provided to model was updated such that the Firm could be responsible
municipal tender option bond trusts are classified as for liquidation of a sponsored member’s account and
derivatives. guarantees any resulting loss to the FICC in the event the
sponsored member fails to fully pay any net liquidation
Whole Loan Sales Guarantees. The Firm has provided, or
amount due from the sponsored member to the FICC.
otherwise agreed to be responsible for, representations and
Accordingly, the Firm’s maximum potential payout amount
warranties regarding certain whole loan sales. Under certain
reflects the total of the estimated net liquidation amounts for
circumstances, the Firm may be required to repurchase such
sponsored member accounts. The Firm minimizes credit
assets or make other payments related to such assets if such
exposure under this guarantee by obtaining a security interest
representations and warranties are breached. The Firm’s
in its sponsored member clients’ collateral and their
maximum potential payout related to such representations and
contractual rights under sponsored member transactions.
warranties is equal to the current UPB of such loans. Since the
Therefore, the Firm's exposure is estimated to be an amount
Firm no longer services these loans, it has no information on
substantially lower than the maximum potential payout
December 2023 Form 10-K 124Table of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
amount. The collateral amount in which the Firm has a believes that any potential requirement to make payments
security interest is approximately equal to the maximum under these agreements is remote.
potential payout amount of the guarantee.
• Merger and Acquisition Guarantees. The Firm may, from
Other Guarantees and Indemnities time to time, in its role as investment banking advisor be
required to provide guarantees in connection with certain
In the normal course of business, the Firm provides European merger and acquisition transactions. If required
guarantees and indemnifications in a variety of transactions. by the regulating authorities, the Firm provides a guarantee
These provisions generally are standard contractual terms. that the acquirer in the transaction has or will have
Certain of these guarantees and indemnifications are sufficient funds to complete the transaction and would then
described below: be required to make the acquisition payments in the event
the acquirer’s funds are insufficient at the completion date
• Indemnities. The Firm provides standard indemnities to
of the transaction. These arrangements generally cover the
counterparties for certain contingent exposures and taxes,
time frame from the transaction offer date to its closing date
including U.S. and foreign withholding taxes, on interest
and, therefore, are generally short term in nature. The Firm
and other payments made on derivatives, securities and
believes the likelihood of any payment by the Firm under
stock lending transactions, certain annuity products and
these arrangements is remote given the level of its due
other financial arrangements. These indemnity payments
diligence in its role as investment banking advisor.
could be required based on a change in the tax laws, a
change in interpretation of applicable tax rulings or a In addition, in the ordinary course of business, the Firm
change in factual circumstances. Certain contracts contain guarantees the debt and/or certain trading obligations
provisions that enable the Firm to terminate the agreement (including obligations associated with derivatives, foreign
upon the occurrence of such events. The Firm may also exchange contracts and the settlement of physical
provide indemnities when it sells a business or assets to a commodities) of certain subsidiaries. These guarantees
third-party, pursuant to which it indemnifies the third-party generally are entity or product specific and are required by
for losses incurred on assets acquired or liabilities assumed investors or trading counterparties. The activities of the
or due to actions taken by the Firm prior to the sale of the Firm’s subsidiaries covered by these guarantees (including
business or assets. The Firm expects the risk of loss any related debt or trading obligations) are included in the
associated with indemnities related to the sale of businesses financial statements.
or assets to be remote. The maximum potential amount of
future payments that the Firm could be required to make Finance Subsidiary
under these indemnifications cannot be estimated.
The Parent Company fully and unconditionally guarantees the
• Exchange/Clearinghouse Member Guarantees. The Firm is securities issued by Morgan Stanley Finance LLC, a wholly
a member of various exchanges and clearinghouses that owned finance subsidiary. No other subsidiary of the Parent
trade and clear securities and/or derivative contracts. Company guarantees these securities.
Associated with its membership, the Firm may be required
to pay a certain amount as determined by the exchange or Contingencies
the clearinghouse in case of a default of any of its members
Legal
or pay a proportionate share of the financial obligations of
another member that may default on its obligations to the
In addition to the matters described below, in the normal
exchange or the clearinghouse. While the rules governing
course of business, the Firm has been named, from time to
different exchange or clearinghouse memberships and the
time, as a defendant in various legal actions, including
forms of these guarantees may vary, in general the Firm’s
arbitrations, class actions and other litigation, arising in
obligations under these rules would arise only if the
connection with its activities as a global diversified financial
exchange or clearinghouse had previously exhausted its
services institution. Certain of the actual or threatened legal
resources.
actions include claims for substantial compensatory and/or
In addition, some clearinghouse rules require members to punitive damages or claims for indeterminate amounts of
assume a proportionate share of losses resulting from the damages. In some cases, the third-party entities that are, or
clearinghouse’s investment of guarantee fund contributions would otherwise be, the primary defendants in such cases are
and initial margin and of other losses unrelated to the bankrupt, in financial distress, or may not honor applicable
default of a clearing member, if such losses exceed the indemnification obligations. These actions have included, but
specified resources allocated for such purpose by the are not limited to, antitrust claims, claims under various false
clearinghouse. claims act statutes, and matters arising from our sales and
trading businesses and our activities in the capital markets.
The maximum potential payout under these rules cannot be
estimated. The Firm has not recorded any contingent The Firm is also involved, from time to time, in other reviews,
liability in its financial statements for these agreements and investigations and proceedings (both formal and informal) by
125 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
governmental and self-regulatory agencies regarding the amount already accrued) to be reasonably possible. In many
Firm’s business, and involving, among other matters, sales, legal proceedings in which the Firm has determined that a
trading, financing, prime brokerage, market-making activities, material loss (or where an accrual has occurred, a material
investment banking advisory services, capital markets loss beyond the amount already accrued) is reasonably
activities, financial products or offerings sponsored, possible, the Firm is unable to reasonably estimate the loss or
underwritten or sold by the Firm, wealth and investment range of loss. There are other matters in which the Firm has
management services, and accounting and operational determined a loss or range of loss to be reasonably possible,
matters, certain of which may result in adverse judgments, but the Firm does not believe, based on current knowledge
settlements, fines, penalties, disgorgement, restitution, and after consultation with counsel, that such losses could
forfeiture, injunctions, limitations on our ability to conduct have a material adverse effect on the Firm’s financial
certain business, or other relief. statements as a whole, although the outcome of such
proceedings or investigations may significantly impact the
The Firm contests liability and/or the amount of damages as Firm’s business or results of operations for any particular
appropriate in each pending matter. Where available reporting period, or cause significant reputational harm.
information indicates that it is probable a liability had been
incurred at the date of the financial statements and the Firm While the Firm has identified below certain proceedings or
can reasonably estimate the amount of that loss or the range investigations that the Firm believes to be material,
of loss, the Firm accrues an estimated loss by a charge to individually or collectively, there can be no assurance that
income, including with respect to certain of the individual material losses will not be incurred from claims that have not
proceedings or investigations described below. yet been asserted or those where potential losses have not yet
been determined to be probable or reasonably possible.
$ in millions 2023 2022 2021
Legal expenses $ 488 $ 443 $ 157 Block Trading Matter
The Firm’s legal expenses can, and may in the future, On January 12, 2024, the U.S. Attorney’s Office for the
fluctuate from period to period, given the current environment Southern District of New York (“USAO”) and the SEC
regarding government or self-regulatory agency investigations announced they had reached settlement agreements with the
and private litigation affecting global financial services firms, Firm in connection with their investigations into the Firm’s
including the Firm. blocks business. Specifically, the Firm entered into a three-
year non-prosecution agreement (“NPA”) with the USAO that
In many legal proceedings and investigations, it is inherently included the payment of forfeiture, restitution, and a criminal
difficult to determine whether any loss is probable or fine for making false statements in connection with the sale of
reasonably possible, or to estimate the amount of any loss. In certain block trades from 2018 through August 2021. The
addition, even where the Firm has determined that a loss is NPA required the Firm to admit responsibility for certain acts
probable or reasonably possible or an exposure to loss or of its employees and to continue to cooperate with and
range of loss exists in excess of the liability already accrued provide certain information to the USAO for the term of the
with respect to a previously recognized loss contingency, the agreement. Additionally, the SEC charged the Firm with
Firm is often unable to reasonably estimate the amount of the violations of Section 10(b) of the Exchange Act and Rule
loss or range of loss. It is particularly difficult to determine if 10b-5(b) thereunder for the disclosure of confidential
a loss is probable or reasonably possible, or to estimate the information about block trades and also violations of Section
amount of loss, where the factual record is being developed or 15(g) of the Exchange Act for the failure to enforce its
contested or where plaintiffs or government entities seek policies concerning the misuse of material non-public
substantial or indeterminate damages, restitution, forfeiture, information related to block trades. As part of the SEC
disgorgement or penalties. Numerous issues may need to be agreement, the Firm paid disgorgement and a civil penalty.
resolved in an investigation or proceeding before a After the agreed-upon credits were applied, the Firm paid a
determination can be made that a loss or additional loss (or total amount of approximately $249 million under both
range of loss or range of additional loss) is probable or settlements. The Firm also faces potential civil liability
reasonably possible, or to estimate the amount of loss, arising from claims that have been or may be asserted by,
including through potentially lengthy discovery or among others, block transaction participants who contend
determination of important factual matters, determination of they were harmed or disadvantaged including, among other
issues related to class certification, the calculation of damages things, as a result of a share price decline allegedly caused by
or other relief, and consideration of novel or unsettled legal the activities of the Firm and/or its employees, or as a result
questions relevant to the proceedings or investigations in of the Firm’s and/or its employees’ failure to adhere to
question. applicable laws and regulations. In addition, the Firm has
responded to demands from shareholders under Section 220
The Firm has identified below any individual proceedings or of the Delaware General Corporation Law for books and
investigations where the Firm believes a material loss (or records concerning the investigations.
where an accrual has occurred, a material loss beyond the
December 2023 Form 10-K 126Table of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Antitrust Related Matters in the United States District Court for the SDNY under the
caption City of Philadelphia, et al. v. Bank of America
The Firm and other financial institutions are responding to a Corporation, et al. Plaintiffs allege, inter alia, that the Firm,
number of governmental investigations and civil litigation along with a number of other financial institution defendants,
matters related to allegations of anticompetitive conduct in violated U.S. antitrust laws and relevant state laws in
various aspects of the financial services industry, including connection with alleged efforts to artificially inflate interest
the matters described below. rates for Variable Rate Demand Obligations (“VRDO”).
Plaintiffs seek, among other relief, treble damages. The class
Beginning in February of 2016, the Firm was named as a action complaint was filed on behalf of a class of municipal
defendant in multiple purported antitrust class actions now issuers of VRDO for which defendants served as remarketing
consolidated into a single proceeding in the United States agent. On November 2, 2020, the court granted in part and
District Court for the Southern District of New York denied in part the defendants’ motion to dismiss the
(“SDNY”) styled In Re: Interest Rate Swaps Antitrust consolidated complaint, dismissing state law claims, but
Litigation. Plaintiffs allege, inter alia, that the Firm, together denying dismissal of the U.S. antitrust claims. On September
with a number of other financial institution defendants, 21, 2023, the court granted plaintiffs’ motion for class
violated U.S. and New York state antitrust laws from 2008 certification. On October 5, 2023, defendants petitioned the
through December of 2016 in connection with their alleged United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit for
efforts to prevent the development of electronic exchange- leave to appeal that decision, which was granted on February
based platforms for interest rate swaps trading. Complaints 5, 2024.
were filed both on behalf of a purported class of investors
who purchased interest rate swaps from defendants, as well as Qui Tam Matters
on behalf of three operators of swap execution facilities that
allegedly were thwarted by the defendants in their efforts to The Firm and other financial institutions are defending against
develop such platforms. The consolidated complaints seek, qui tam litigations brought under various state false claims
among other relief, certification of the investor class of statutes, including the matter described below. Such matters
plaintiffs and treble damages. On July 28, 2017, the court may involve the same types of claims pursued in multiple
granted in part and denied in part the defendants’ motion to jurisdictions and may include claims for treble damages.
dismiss the complaints. On December 15, 2023, the court
denied the class plaintiffs’ motion for class certification. On On August 18, 2009, Relators Roger Hayes and C. Talbot
December 29, 2023, the class plaintiffs petitioned the United Heppenstall, Jr., filed a qui tam action in New Jersey state
States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit for leave to court styled State of New Jersey ex. rel. Hayes v. Bank of
appeal that decision. America Corp., et al. The complaint, filed under seal pursuant
to the New Jersey False Claims Act, alleged that the Firm and
In August of 2017, the Firm was named as a defendant in a several other underwriters of municipal bonds had defrauded
purported antitrust class action in the United States District New Jersey issuers by misrepresenting that they would
Court for the SDNY styled Iowa Public Employees’ achieve the best price or lowest cost of capital in connection
Retirement System et al. v. Bank of America Corporation et with certain municipal bond issuances. On March 17, 2016,
al. Plaintiffs allege, inter alia, that the Firm, together with a the court entered an order unsealing the complaint. On
number of other financial institution defendants, violated U.S. November 17, 2017, Relators filed an amended complaint to
antitrust laws and New York state law in connection with allege the Firm mispriced certain bonds issued in twenty-three
their alleged efforts to prevent the development of electronic bond offerings between 2008 and 2017, having a total par
exchange-based platforms for securities lending. The class amount of $6.9 billion. The complaint seeks, among other
action complaint was filed on behalf of a purported class of relief, treble damages. On February 22, 2018, the Firm moved
borrowers and lenders who entered into stock loan to dismiss the amended complaint, and on July 17, 2018, the
transactions with the defendants. The class action complaint court denied the Firm’s motion. On October 13, 2021,
seeks, among other relief, certification of the class of following a series of voluntary and involuntary dismissals,
plaintiffs and treble damages. On September 27, 2018, the Relators limited their claims to certain bonds issued in five
court denied the defendants’ motion to dismiss the class offerings the Firm underwrote between 2008 and 2011,
action complaint. Plaintiffs’ motion for class certification was having a total par amount of $3.9 billion. On August 22,
referred by the District Court to a magistrate judge who, on 2023, the Firm reached an agreement in principle to settle the
June 30, 2022, issued a report and recommendation that the litigation.
District Court certify a class. On May 20, 2023, the Firm
European Matters
reached an agreement in principle to settle the litigation. On
September 1, 2023, the court granted preliminary approval of
Tax
the settlement.
In matters styled Case number 15/3637 and Case number
The Firm is a defendant in three antitrust class action
15/4353, the Dutch Tax Authority (“Dutch Authority”) is
complaints which have been consolidated into one proceeding
challenging in the Dutch courts the prior set-off by the Firm
127 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
of approximately €124 million (approximately $137 million) February 4, 2019, the Firm filed its defense to the matter now
plus accrued interest of withholding tax credits against the styled Case number B-803-18.
Firm’s corporation tax liabilities for the tax years 2007 to
2012. The Dutch Authority alleges that the Firm was not U.K. Government Bond Matter
entitled to receive the withholding tax credits on the basis,
inter alia, that a Firm subsidiary did not hold legal title to The Firm is engaging with the UK Competition and Markets
certain securities subject to withholding tax on the relevant Authority in connection with its investigation of suspected
dates. The Dutch Authority has also alleged that the Firm anti-competitive arrangements in the financial services sector,
failed to provide certain information to the Dutch Authority specifically regarding the Firm's activities concerning certain
and to keep adequate books and records. On April 26, 2018, liquid fixed income products between 2009 and 2012. On
the District Court in Amsterdam issued a decision dismissing May 24, 2023, the U.K. Competition and Markets Authority
the Dutch Authority’s claims with respect to certain of the tax issued a Statement of Objections setting out its provisional
years in dispute. On May 12, 2020, the Court of Appeal in findings that the Firm had breached U.K. competition law by
Amsterdam granted the Dutch Authority's appeal in matters sharing competitively sensitive information in connection
re-styled Case number 18/00318 and Case number 18/00319. with gilts and gilt asset swaps between 2009 and 2012. The
On January 19, 2024, the Dutch High Court granted the Firm is contesting the provisional findings. Separately, on
Firm’s appeal in matters re-styled Case number 20/01884 and June 16, 2023, the Firm was named as a defendant in a
referred the case to the Court of Appeal in The Hague. purported antitrust class action in the United States District
Court for the SDNY styled Oklahoma Firefighters Pension
On June 22, 2021, Dutch criminal authorities sought various and Retirement System v. Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft,
documents in connection with an investigation of the Firm et al., alleging, inter alia, that the Firm, together with a
related to the civil claims asserted by the Dutch Authority number of other financial institution defendants, violated U.S.
concerning the accuracy of the Firm subsidiary’s tax returns antitrust laws in connection with their alleged effort to fix
and the maintenance of its books and records for 2007 to prices of gilts traded in the United States between 2009 and
2012. The Dutch criminal authorities have requested 2013. On September 28, 2023, the defendants filed a joint
additional information, and the Firm is continuing to respond motion to dismiss the complaint, which has been fully briefed.
to them in connection with their ongoing investigation.
Other
Danish Underwriting Matter
On August 13, 2021, the plaintiff in Camelot Event Driven
On October 5, 2017, various institutional investors filed a Fund, a Series of Frank Funds Trust v. Morgan Stanley & Co.
claim against the Firm and another bank in a matter now LLC, et al. filed in the Supreme Court of the State of New
styled Case number B-803-18 (previously BS 99-6998/2017), York, New York County ("Supreme Court of NY") a
in the City Court of Copenhagen, Denmark concerning their purported class action complaint alleging violations of the
roles as underwriters of the initial public offering (“IPO”) in federal securities laws against ViacomCBS (“Viacom”),
March 2014 of the Danish company OW Bunker A/S. The certain of its officers and directors, and the underwriters,
claim seeks damages of approximately DKK529 million including the Firm, of two March 2021 Viacom offerings: a
(approximately $79 million) plus interest in respect of alleged $1.7 billion Viacom Class B Common Stock offering and a
losses arising from investing in shares in OW Bunker, which $1 billion offering of 5.75% Series A Mandatory Convertible
entered into bankruptcy in November 2014. Separately, on Preferred Stock (collectively, the “Offerings”). The complaint
November 29, 2017, another group of institutional investors alleges, inter alia, that the Viacom offering documents for
joined the Firm and another bank as defendants to pending both issuances contained material omissions because they did
proceedings in the High Court of Eastern Denmark against not disclose that certain of the underwriters, including the
various other parties involved in the IPO in a matter styled Firm, had prime brokerage relationships and served as
Case number B-2073-16. The claim brought against the Firm counterparties to certain derivative transactions with
and the other bank has been given its own Case number Archegos Capital Management LP, (“Archegos”), a fund with
B-2564-17. The investors claim damages of approximately significant exposure to Viacom securities across multiple
DKK767 million (approximately $114 million) plus interest prime brokers. The complaint, which seeks, among other
from the Firm and the other bank on a joint and several basis things, unspecified compensatory damages, alleges that the
with the Defendants to these proceedings. Both claims are offering documents did not adequately disclose the risks
based on alleged prospectus liability; the second claim also associated with Archegos’s concentrated Viacom positions at
alleges professional liability of banks acting as financial the various prime brokers, including that the unwind of those
intermediaries. On June 8, 2018, the City Court of positions could have a deleterious impact on the stock price of
Copenhagen, Denmark ordered that the matters now styled Viacom. On November 5, 2021, the complaint was amended
Case number B-803-18, Case number B-2073-16, and Case to add allegations that defendants failed to disclose that
number B-2564-17 be heard together before the High Court of certain underwriters, including the Firm, had intended to
Eastern Denmark. On June 29, 2018, the Firm filed its unwind Archegos’s Viacom positions while simultaneously
defense to the matter now styled Case number B-2564-17. On distributing the Offerings. On February 6, 2023, the court
issued a decision denying the motions to dismiss as to the
December 2023 Form 10-K 128Table of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Firm and the other underwriters, but granted the motion to • Guarantees issued and residual interests retained in
dismiss as to Viacom and the Viacom individual defendants. connection with municipal bond securitizations.
On February 15, 2023, the underwriters, including the Firm, • Loans made to and investments in VIEs that hold debt,
filed their notices of appeal of the denial of their motions to equity, real estate or other assets.
dismiss. On March 10, 2023, the plaintiff appealed the • Derivatives entered into with VIEs.
dismissal of Viacom and the individual Viacom defendants. • Structuring of CLNs or other asset-repackaging notes
On January 4, 2024, the court granted the plaintiff’s motion designed to meet the investment objectives of clients.
for class certification. On February 14, 2024, the defendants • Other structured transactions designed to provide tax-
filed their notice of appeal. efficient yields to the Firm or its clients.
On May 17, 2013, the plaintiff in IKB International S.A. in The Firm determines whether it is the primary beneficiary of a
Liquidation, et al. v. Morgan Stanley, et al. filed a complaint VIE upon its initial involvement with the VIE and reassesses
against the Firm and certain affiliates in the Supreme Court of whether it is the primary beneficiary on an ongoing basis as
NY. The complaint alleges that defendants made material long as it has any continuing involvement with the VIE. This
misrepresentations and omissions in the sale to plaintiff of determination is based upon an analysis of the design of the
certain mortgage pass-through certificates backed by VIE, including the VIE’s structure and activities, the power to
securitization trusts containing residential mortgage loans. make significant economic decisions held by the Firm and by
The total amount of certificates allegedly sponsored, other parties, and the variable interests owned by the Firm and
underwritten and/or sold by the Firm to plaintiffs was other parties.
approximately $133 million. The complaint alleges causes of
The power to make the most significant economic decisions
action against the Firm for common law fraud, fraudulent
may take a number of different forms in different types of
concealment, aiding and abetting fraud, and negligent
VIEs. The Firm considers servicing or collateral management
misrepresentation, and seeks, among other things,
decisions as representing the power to make the most
compensatory and punitive damages. On October 29, 2014,
significant economic decisions in transactions such as
the court granted in part and denied in part the Firm’s motion
securitizations or CDOs. As a result, the Firm does not
to dismiss. All claims regarding four certificates were
consolidate securitizations or CDOs for which it does not act
dismissed. After these dismissals, the remaining amount of
as the servicer or collateral manager unless it holds certain
certificates allegedly issued by the Firm or sold to plaintiffs
other rights to replace the servicer or collateral manager or to
by the Firm was approximately $116 million. On August 11,
require the liquidation of the entity. If the Firm serves as
2016, the Appellate Division, First Department affirmed the
servicer or collateral manager, or has certain other rights
trial court’s order denying in part the Firm’s motion to
described in the previous sentence, the Firm analyzes the
dismiss the complaint. On July 15, 2022, the Firm filed a
interests in the VIE that it holds and consolidates only those
motion for summary judgment on all remaining claims. On
VIEs for which it holds a potentially significant interest in the
March 1, 2023, the court granted in part and denied in part the
VIE.
Firm’s motion for summary judgment, narrowing the alleged
misrepresentations at issue in the case. On March 14, 2023,
For many transactions, such as re-securitization transactions,
the Firm filed its notice of appeal, and on March 21, 2023,
CLNs and other asset-repackaging notes, there are no
plaintiffs filed their notice of cross appeal.
significant economic decisions made on an ongoing basis. In
these cases, the Firm focuses its analysis on decisions made
15. Variable Interest Entities and Securitization
prior to the initial closing of the transaction and at the
Activities
termination of the transaction. The Firm concluded in most of
these transactions that decisions made prior to the initial
Overview
closing were shared between the Firm and the initial investors
based upon the nature of the assets, including whether the
The Firm is involved with various SPEs in the normal course
assets were issued in a transaction sponsored by the Firm and
of business. In most cases, these entities are deemed to be
the extent of the information available to the Firm and to
VIEs.
investors, the number, nature and involvement of investors,
The Firm’s variable interests in VIEs include debt and equity other rights held by the Firm and investors, the
interests, commitments, guarantees, derivative instruments standardization of the legal documentation and the level of
and certain fees. The Firm’s involvement with VIEs arises continuing involvement by the Firm, including the amount
primarily from: and type of interests owned by the Firm and by other
investors. The Firm focused its control decision on any right
• Interests purchased in connection with market-making held by the Firm or investors related to the termination of the
activities, securities held in its Investment securities VIE. Most re-securitization transactions, CLNs and other
portfolio and retained interests held as a result of asset-repackaging notes have no such termination rights.
securitization activities, including re-securitization
transactions.
129 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Consolidated VIE Assets and Liabilities by Type of Activity Non-consolidated VIEs
At December 31, 2023 At December 31, 2022 At December 31, 2023
$ in millions VIE Assets VIE Liabilities VIE Assets VIE Liabilities $ in millions MABS1 CDO MTOB OSF Other2
MABS1 $ 597 $ 256 $ 1,153 $ 520 VIE assets (UPB) $ 144,906 $ 1,526 $ 3,152 $ 3,102 $ 50,052
Investment vehicles2 753 502 638 272 Maximum exposure to loss3
MTOB 582 520 371 322 Debt and equity interests $ 21,203 $ 52 $ — $ 2,049 $ 9,076
Other 378 97 519 199 Derivative and other contracts — — 2,092 — 4,452
Total $ 2,310 $ 1,375 $ 2,681 $ 1,313 Commitments, guarantees and
other 3,439 — — — 55
MTOB—Municipal tender option bonds Total $ 24,642 $ 52 $ 2,092 $ 2,049 $ 13,583
1. Amounts include transactions backed by residential mortgage loans, commercial Carrying value of variable interests—Assets
mortgage loans and other types of assets, including consumer or commercial
assets and may be in loan or security form. The value of assets is determined Debt and equity interests $ 21,203 $ 52 $ — $ 1,682 $ 9,075
based on the fair value of the liabilities and the interests owned by the Firm in such Derivative and other contracts — — 2 — 1,330
VIEs as the fair values for the liabilities and interests owned are more observable.
2. Amounts include investment funds and CLOs. Total $ 21,203 $ 52 $ 2 $ 1,682 $ 10,405
Additional VIE assets owned4 $ 15,002
Consolidated VIE Assets and Liabilities by Balance Sheet Carrying value of variable interests—Liabilities
Caption Derivative and other contracts $ — $ — $ 3 $ — $ 452
At At At December 31, 2022
December 31, December 31, $ in millions MABS1 CDO MTOB OSF Other2
$ in millions 2023 2022
VIE assets (UPB) $ 123,601 $ 3,162 $ 4,632 $ 2,403 $ 50,178
Assets
Maximum exposure to loss3
Cash and cash equivalents $ 164 $ 142
Debt and equity interests $ 13,104 $ 274 $ — $ 1,694 $ 11,596
Trading assets at fair value 1,557 2,066
Derivative and other contracts — — 3,200 — 5,211
Investment securities 492 255
Commitments, guarantees and
Securities purchased under agreements to other 674 — — — 1,410
resell 67 200
Total $ 13,778 $ 274 $ 3,200 $ 1,694 $ 18,217
Customer and other receivables 26 16
Carrying value of variable interests—Assets
Other assets 4 2
Debt and equity interests $ 13,104 $ 274 $ — $ 1,577 $ 11,596
Total $ 2,310 $ 2,681
Derivative and other contracts — — 3 — 1,564
Liabilities
Total $ 13,104 $ 274 $ 3 $ 1,577 $ 13,160
Other secured financings $ 1,222 $ 1,185
Additional VIE assets owned4 $ 13,708
Other liabilities and accrued expenses 121 124
Carrying value of variable interests—Liabilities
Borrowings 32 4
Derivative and other contracts $ — $ — $ 3 $ — $ 281
Total $ 1,375 $ 1,313
Noncontrolling interests $ 54 $ 71 1. Amounts include transactions backed by residential mortgage loans, commercial
mortgage loans and other types of assets, including consumer or commercial
assets, and may be in loan or security form.
Consolidated VIE assets and liabilities are presented in the 2. Other primarily includes exposures to commercial real estate property and
investment funds.
previous tables after intercompany eliminations. Generally,
3. Where notional amounts are utilized in quantifying the maximum exposure related
most assets owned by consolidated VIEs cannot be removed to derivatives, such amounts do not reflect changes in fair value recorded by the
Firm.
unilaterally by the Firm and are not available to the Firm
4. Additional VIE assets owned represents the carrying value of total exposure to non-
while the related liabilities issued by consolidated VIEs are consolidated VIEs for which the maximum exposure to loss is less than specific
thresholds, primarily interests issued by securitization SPEs. The Firm’s maximum
non-recourse to the Firm. However, in certain consolidated
exposure to loss generally equals the fair value of the assets owned. These assets
VIEs, the Firm either has the unilateral right to remove assets are primarily included in Trading assets and Investment securities and are
measured at fair value (see Note 4). The Firm does not provide additional support
or provides additional recourse through derivatives such as in these transactions through contractual facilities, guarantees or similar derivatives.
total return swaps, guarantees or other forms of involvement.
The previous tables include VIEs sponsored by unrelated
In general, the Firm’s exposure to loss in consolidated VIEs is parties, as well as VIEs sponsored by the Firm; examples of
limited to losses that would be absorbed on the VIE net assets the Firm’s involvement with these VIEs include its secondary
recognized in its financial statements, net of amounts market-making activities and the securities held in its
absorbed by third-party variable interest holders. Investment securities portfolio (see Note 7).
The Firm’s maximum exposure to loss is dependent on the
nature of the Firm’s variable interest in the VIE and is limited
to the notional amounts of certain liquidity facilities and other
credit support, total return swaps and written put options, as
well as the fair value of certain other derivatives and
investments the Firm has made in the VIE.
The Firm’s maximum exposure to loss in the previous tables
does not include the offsetting benefit of hedges or any
reductions associated with the amount of collateral held as
December 2023 Form 10-K 130Table of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
part of a transaction with the VIE or any party to the VIE securities issued by VIEs backed by student loans and
directly against a specific exposure to loss. commercial mortgage loans. Transactions sponsored by the
federal mortgage agencies include an explicit or implicit
Liabilities issued by VIEs generally are non-recourse to the guarantee provided by the U.S. government. Additionally, the
Firm. Firm holds certain commercial mortgage-backed securities
issued by VIEs retained as a result of the Firm's securitization
Detail of Mortgage- and Asset-Backed Securitization Assets
activities. See Note 7 for further information on the
At December 31, 2023 At December 31, 2022 Investment securities portfolio.
Debt and Debt and
Equity Equity Municipal Tender Option Bond Trusts
$ in millions UPB Interests UPB Interests
Residential mortgages $ 17,346 $ 3,355 $ 20,428 $ 2,570
In a municipal tender option bond trust transaction, the client
Commercial mortgages 74,590 8,342 67,540 4,236
transfers a municipal bond to a trust. The trust issues short-
U.S. agency collateralized
mortgage obligations 42,917 6,675 32,567 4,729 term securities that the Firm, as the remarketing agent, sells to
Other consumer or investors. The client generally retains a residual interest. The
commercial loans 10,053 2,831 3,066 1,569
short-term securities are supported by a liquidity facility
Total $ 144,906 $ 21,203 $ 123,601 $ 13,104
pursuant to which the investors may put their short-term
interests. In most programs, a third-party provider will
Securitization Activities
provide such liquidity facility; in some programs, the Firm
In a securitization transaction, the Firm transfers assets provides this liquidity facility.
(generally commercial or residential mortgage loans or
The Firm may, in lieu of purchasing short-term securities for
securities) to an SPE; sells to investors most of the beneficial
remarketing, decide to extend a temporary loan to the trust.
interests, such as notes or certificates, issued by the SPE; and,
The client can generally terminate the transaction at any time.
in many cases, retains other beneficial interests. The purchase
The liquidity provider can generally terminate the transaction
of the transferred assets by the SPE is financed through the
upon the occurrence of certain events. When the transaction is
sale of these interests.
terminated, the municipal bond is generally sold or returned to
In many securitization transactions involving commercial the client. Any losses suffered by the liquidity provider upon
mortgage loans, the Firm transfers a portion of the assets to the sale of the bond are the responsibility of the client. This
the SPE with unrelated parties transferring the remaining obligation is generally collateralized. Liquidity facilities
assets. In addition, mainly in securitization transactions provided to municipal tender option bond trusts are classified
involving residential mortgage loans, the Firm may also enter as derivatives. The Firm consolidates any municipal tender
into derivative transactions, primarily interest rate swaps or option bond trusts in which it holds the residual interest.
interest rate caps, with the SPE.
Credit Protection Purchased through Credit-Linked Notes
Although not obligated, the Firm generally makes a market in
CLN transactions are designed to provide investors with
the securities issued by SPEs in securitization transactions. As
exposure to certain credit risk on referenced assets. In these
a market maker, the Firm offers to buy these securities from,
transactions, the Firm transfers assets (generally high-quality
and sell these securities to, investors. Securities purchased
securities or money-market investments) to an SPE, enters
through these market-making activities are not considered to
into a derivative transaction in which the SPE sells protection
be retained interests; these beneficial interests generally are
on an unrelated referenced asset or group of assets, through a
included in Trading assets—Corporate and other debt and are
credit derivative, and sells the securities issued by the SPE to
measured at fair value.
investors. In some transactions, the Firm may also enter into
The Firm enters into derivatives, generally interest rate swaps interest rate or currency swaps with the SPE. Depending on
and interest rate caps, with a senior payment priority in many the structure, the assets and liabilities of the SPE may be
securitization transactions. The risks associated with these and consolidated and recognized in the Firm’s balance sheet or
similar derivatives with SPEs are essentially the same as accounted for as a sale of assets.
similar derivatives with non-SPE counterparties and are
Upon the occurrence of a credit event related to the referenced
managed as part of the Firm’s overall exposure. See Note 6
asset, the SPE will deliver securities collateral as payment to
for further information on derivative instruments and hedging
the Firm, which exposes the Firm to changes in the
activities.
collateral’s value.
Investment Securities
Derivative payments by the SPE are collateralized. The risks
The Firm holds securities issued by VIEs within the associated with these and similar derivatives with SPEs are
Investment securities portfolio. These securities are composed essentially the same as those with non-SPE counterparties and
of those related to transactions sponsored by the federal are managed as part of the Firm’s overall exposure.
mortgage agencies and predominantly the most senior
131 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Other Structured Financings Transferred Assets with Continuing Involvement
At December 31, 2023
The Firm invests in interests issued by entities that develop
U.S. Agency CLN and
and own low-income communities (including low-income $ in millions RML CML CMO Other1
housing projects) and entities that construct and own facilities SPE assets (UPB)2, 3 $ 4,333 $ 73,818 $ 12,083 $ 12,438
that will generate energy from renewable resources. The Retained interests
interests entitle the Firm to a share of tax credits and tax Investment grade $ 149 $ 653 $ 460 $ —
losses generated by these projects. In addition, the Firm has Non-investment grade 83 788 — 69
issued guarantees to investors in certain low-income housing Total $ 232 $ 1,441 $ 460 $ 69
funds. The guarantees are designed to return an investor’s Interests purchased in the secondary market3
contribution to a fund and the investor’s share of tax losses Investment grade $ 20 $ 22 $ 42 $ —
Non-investment grade — 16 — —
and tax credits expected to be generated by the fund. The
Total $ 20 $ 38 $ 42 $ —
Firm is also involved with entities designed to provide tax-
Derivative assets $ — $ — $ — $ 1,073
efficient yields to the Firm or its clients.
Derivative liabilities — — — 426
Collateralized Loan and Debt Obligations At December 31, 2022
U.S. Agency CLN and
CLOs and CDOs are SPEs that purchase a pool of assets $ in millions RML CML CMO Other1
SPE assets (UPB)2, 3 $ 3,732 $ 73,069 $ 6,448 $ 10,928
consisting of corporate loans, corporate bonds, ABS or
Retained interests
synthetic exposures on similar assets through derivatives and
Investment grade $ 137 $ 927 $ 367 $ —
issue multiple tranches of debt and equity securities to
Non-investment grade 26 465 11 44
investors. The Firm underwrites the securities issued in
Total $ 163 $ 1,392 $ 378 $ 44
certain CLO transactions on behalf of unaffiliated sponsors Interests purchased in the secondary market5
and provides advisory services to these unaffiliated sponsors.
Investment grade $ 82 $ 51 $ 10 $ —
The Firm sells corporate loans to many of these SPEs, in Non-investment grade 35 23 — —
some cases representing a significant portion of the total Total $ 117 $ 74 $ 10 $ —
assets purchased. Although not obligated, the Firm generally Derivative assets $ — $ — $ — $ 1,114
makes a market in the securities issued by SPEs in these Derivative liabilities — — — 201
transactions and may retain unsold securities. These beneficial
Fair Value at December 31, 2023
interests are included in Trading assets and are measured at
$ in millions Level 2 Level 3 Total
fair value. Retained interests
Investment grade $ 576 $ — $ 576
Equity-Linked Notes
Non-investment grade 10 56 66
Total $ 586 $ 56 $ 642
ELN transactions are designed to provide investors with Interests purchased in the secondary market3
exposure to certain risks related to the specific equity security,
Investment grade $ 77 $ 7 $ 84
equity index or other index. In an ELN transaction, the Firm Non-investment grade 12 4 16
typically transfers to an SPE either a note issued by the Firm, Total $ 89 $ 11 $ 100
the payments on which are linked to the performance of a Derivative assets $ 1,073 $ — $ 1,073
specific equity security, equity index or other index, or debt Derivative liabilities 426 — 426
securities issued by other companies and a derivative contract,
Fair Value at December 31, 2022
the terms of which will relate to the performance of a specific
$ in millions Level 2 Level 3 Total
equity security, equity index or other index. These ELN Retained interests
transactions with SPEs were not consolidated at December Investment grade $ 489 $ — $ 489
31, 2023 or December 31, 2022. Non-investment grade 25 16 41
Total $ 514 $ 16 $ 530
Interests purchased in the secondary market3
Investment grade $ 140 $ 3 $ 143
Non-investment grade 42 16 58
Total $ 182 $ 19 $ 201
Derivative assets $ 1,114 $ — $ 1,114
Derivative liabilities 153 48 201
RML—Residential mortgage loans
CML—Commercial mortgage loans
1. Amounts include CLO transactions managed by unrelated third parties.
2. Amounts include assets transferred by unrelated transferors.
3. Amounts include transactions where the Firm also holds retained interests as part
of the transfer.
The previous tables include transactions with SPEs in which
the Firm, acting as principal, transferred financial assets with
December 2023 Form 10-K 132Table of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
continuing involvement and received sales treatment. The 16. Regulatory Requirements
transferred assets are carried at fair value prior to
securitization, and any changes in fair value are recognized in Regulatory Capital Framework
the income statement. The Firm may act as underwriter of the
beneficial interests issued by these securitization vehicles, for The Firm is an FHC under the Bank Holding Company Act of
which Investment banking revenues are recognized. The Firm 1956, as amended, and is subject to the regulation and
may retain interests in the securitized financial assets as one oversight of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
or more tranches of the securitization. Certain retained System (“Federal Reserve”). The Federal Reserve establishes
interests are carried at fair value in the balance sheet with capital requirements for the Firm, including “well-
changes in fair value recognized in the income statement. Fair capitalized” standards, and evaluates the Firm’s compliance
value for these interests is measured using techniques that are with such capital requirements. The OCC establishes similar
consistent with the valuation techniques applied to the Firm’s capital requirements and standards for the Firm’s U.S. bank
major categories of assets and liabilities as described in Notes subsidiaries, including, among others, MSBNA and
2 and 4. Further, as permitted by applicable guidance, certain MSPBNA (together, “U.S. Bank Subsidiaries”). The
transfers of assets where the Firm’s only continuing regulatory capital requirements are largely based on the Basel
involvement is a derivative are only reported in the following III capital standards established by the Basel Committee on
Assets Sold with Retained Exposure table. Banking Supervision and also implement certain provisions of
the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection
Proceeds from New Securitization Transactions and Sales of Act. In addition, many of the Firm’s regulated subsidiaries are
Loans subject to regulatory capital requirements, including regulated
subsidiaries registered as swap dealers with the CFTC or
$ in millions 2023 2022 2021
New transactions1 $ 21,051 $ 22,136 $ 57,528 conditionally registered as security-based swap dealers with
Retained interests 4,311 4,862 8,822 the SEC or registered as broker-dealers or futures commission
Sales of corporate loans to CLO SPEs1, 2 24 62 169 merchants.
1. Net gains on new transactions and sales of corporate loans to CLO entities at the
time of the sale were not material for all periods presented. Regulatory Capital Requirements
2. Sponsored by non-affiliates.
The Firm is required to maintain minimum risk-based and
The Firm has provided, or otherwise agreed to be responsible
leverage-based capital ratios under regulatory capital
for, representations and warranties regarding certain assets
requirements. A summary of the calculations of regulatory
transferred in securitization transactions sponsored by the
capital and RWA follows.
Firm (see Note 14).
Risk-Based Regulatory Capital. Risk-based capital ratio
Assets Sold with Retained Exposure
requirements apply to Common Equity Tier 1 capital, Tier 1
At At capital and Total capital (which includes Tier 2 capital), each
December 31, December 31,
as a percentage of RWA, and consist of regulatory minimum
$ in millions 2023 2022
Gross cash proceeds from sale of assets1 $ 60,766 $ 49,059 required ratios plus the Firm’s capital buffer requirement.
Fair value Capital requirements require certain adjustments to, and
Assets sold $ 62,221 $ 47,281 deductions from, capital for purposes of determining these
Derivative assets recognized in the balance ratios.
sheet 1,546 116
Derivative liabilities recognized in the CECL Deferral. Beginning on January 1, 2020, the Firm
balance sheet 93 1,893
elected to defer the effect of the adoption of CECL on its risk-
1. The carrying value of assets derecognized at the time of sale approximates gross based and leverage-based capital amounts and ratios, as well
cash proceeds.
as RWA, adjusted average assets and supplementary leverage
The Firm enters into transactions in which it sells securities, exposure calculations, over a five-year transition period. The
primarily equities, and contemporaneously enters into deferral impacts began to phase in at 25% per year from
bilateral OTC derivatives with the purchasers of the January 1, 2022 and are phased-in at 50% from January 1,
securities, through which it retains exposure to the sold 2023. The deferral impacts will become fully phased-in
securities. beginning on January 1, 2025.
133 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Capital Buffer Requirements The Firm’s risk-based capital ratios are computed under both
(i) the Standardized Approach and (ii) the Advanced
At December
Approach. The credit risk RWA calculations between the two
At At 31, 2023 and
December 31, December 31, December 31, approaches differ in that the Standardized Approach requires
2023 2022 2022
calculation of RWA using prescribed risk weights, whereas
Standardized Standardized Advanced
Capital buffers the Advanced Approach utilizes models to calculate exposure
Capital conservation buffer — — 2.5% amounts and risk weights. At December 31, 2023 and
SCB 5.4% 5.8% N/A December 31, 2022, the differences between the actual and
G-SIB capital surcharge 3.0% 3.0% 3.0% required ratio were lower under the Standardized Approach.
CCyB1 0% 0% 0%
Capital buffer requirement 8.4% 8.8% 5.5% Leverage-Based Regulatory Capital. Leverage-based capital
requirements include a minimum Tier 1 leverage ratio of 4%,
1. The CCyB can be set up to 2.5% but is currently set by the Federal Reserve at
a minimum SLR of 3% and an enhanced SLR capital buffer
zero.
of at least 2%.
The capital buffer requirement represents the amount of
Common Equity Tier 1 capital the Firm must maintain above The Firm’s Regulatory Capital and Capital Ratios
the minimum risk-based capital requirements in order to avoid
restrictions on the Firm’s ability to make capital distributions,
Required At December Required At December
including the payment of dividends and the repurchase of $ in millions Ratio1 31, 2023 Ratio1 31, 2022
Risk-based capital
stock, and to pay discretionary bonuses to executive officers.
Common Equity Tier 1 capital $ 69,448 $ 68,670
The Firm’s capital buffer requirement computed under the
Tier 1 capital 78,183 77,191
standardized approaches for calculating credit risk and market
Total capital 88,874 86,575
risk RWA (“Standardized Approach”) is equal to the sum of
Total RWA 456,053 447,849
the SCB, G-SIB capital surcharge and CCyB, and the capital
Common Equity Tier 1
buffer requirement computed under the applicable advanced capital ratio 12.9% 15.2% 13.3% 15.3%
approaches for calculating credit risk, market risk and Tier 1 capital ratio 14.4% 17.1% 14.8% 17.2%
operational risk RWA (“Advanced Approach”) is equal to the Total capital ratio 16.4% 19.5% 16.8% 19.3%
sum of the 2.5% capital conservation buffer, G-SIB capital
Required At December 31, At December 31,
surcharge and CCyB. $ in millions Ratio1 2023 2022
Leverage-based capital
Risk-Based Regulatory Capital Ratio Requirements Adjusted average assets2 $ 1,159,626 $ 1,150,772
Tier 1 leverage ratio 4.0% 6.7% 6.7%
At December
At At 31, 2023 and Supplementary leverage exposure3 $ 1,429,552 $ 1,399,403
December 31, December 31, December 31, SLR 5.0% 5.5% 5.5%
Regulatory 2023 2022 2022
Minimum Standardized Standardized Advanced 1. Required ratios are inclusive of any buffers applicable as of the date presented.
Required 2. Adjusted average assets represents the denominator of the Tier 1 leverage ratio
ratios1 and is composed of the average daily balance of consolidated on-balance sheet
assets for the quarters ending on the respective balance sheet dates, reduced by
Common Equity
Tier 1 capital disallowed goodwill, intangible assets, investments in covered funds, defined
ratio 4.5% 12.9% 13.3% 10.0% benefit pension plan assets, after-tax gain on sale from assets sold into
securitizations, investments in the Firm’s own capital instruments, certain defined
Tier 1 capital tax assets and other capital deductions.
ratio 6.0% 14.4% 14.8% 11.5%
3. Supplementary leverage exposure is the sum of Adjusted average assets used in
Total capital the Tier 1 leverage ratio and other adjustments, primarily: (i) for derivatives,
ratio 8.0% 16.4% 16.8% 13.5% potential future exposure and the effective notional principal amount of sold credit
protection, offset by qualifying purchased credit protection; (ii) the counterparty
1. Required ratios represent the regulatory minimum plus the capital buffer
credit risk for repo-style transactions; and (iii) the credit equivalent amount for off-
requirement.
balance sheet exposures.
Risk-Weighted Assets
U.S. Bank Subsidiaries’ Regulatory Capital and Capital
Ratios
RWA reflects both the Firm’s on- and off-balance sheet risk,
as well as capital charges attributable to the risk of loss
The OCC establishes capital requirements for the U.S. Bank
arising from the following:
Subsidiaries, and evaluates their compliance with such capital
requirements. Regulatory capital requirements for the U.S.
• Credit Risk: The failure of a borrower, counterparty or
Bank Subsidiaries are calculated in a similar manner to the
issuer to meet its financial obligations to the Firm;
Firm’s regulatory capital requirements, although G-SIB
• Market Risk: Adverse changes in the level of one or more
capital surcharge and SCB requirements do not apply to the
market prices, rates, indices, volatilities, correlations or
U.S. Bank Subsidiaries.
other market factors, such as market liquidity; and
• Operational Risk: Inadequate or failed processes or systems
The OCC’s regulatory capital framework includes Prompt
from human factors or from external events (e.g., fraud,
Corrective Action (“PCA”) standards, including “well-
theft, legal and compliance risks, cyberattacks or damage to
capitalized” PCA standards that are based on specified
physical assets).
regulatory capital ratio minimums. For the Firm to remain an
December 2023 Form 10-K 134Table of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
FHC, its U.S. Bank Subsidiaries must remain well-capitalized Other Regulatory Capital Requirements
in accordance with the OCC’s PCA standards. In addition,
failure by the U.S. Bank Subsidiaries to meet minimum MS&Co. Regulatory Capital
capital requirements may result in certain mandatory and
At At
discretionary actions by regulators that, if undertaken, could $ in millions December 31, 2023 December 31, 2022
have a direct material effect on the U.S. Bank Subsidiaries’ Net capital $ 18,121 $ 17,224
and the Firm’s financial statements. Excess net capital 13,676 12,861
At December 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, MSBNA and MS&Co. is registered as a broker-dealer and a futures
MSPBNA risk-based capital ratios are based on the commission merchant with the SEC and the CFTC,
Standardized Approach rules. Beginning on January 1, 2020, respectively, and is registered as a swap dealer with the
MSBNA and MSPBNA elected to defer the effect of the CFTC.
adoption of CECL on risk-based capital amounts and ratios,
as well as RWA, adjusted average assets and supplementary As an Alternative Net Capital broker-dealer, and in
leverage exposure calculations, over a five-year transition accordance with Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (“Exchange
period. The deferral impacts began to phase in at 25% per Act”) Rule 15c3-1, Appendix E, MS&Co. is subject to
year from January 1, 2022 and are phased-in at 50% from minimum net capital and tentative net capital requirements
January 1, 2023. The deferral impacts will become fully and operates with capital in excess of its regulatory capital
phased-in beginning on January 1, 2025. requirements. As a futures commission merchant and
registered swap dealer, MS&Co. is subject to CFTC capital
MSBNA’s Regulatory Capital requirements. In addition, MS&Co. must notify the SEC if its
tentative net capital falls below certain levels. At December
At December At December
Well- 31, 2023 31, 2022 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, MS&Co. exceeded its net
Capitalized Required
$ in millions Requirement Ratio1 Amount Ratio Amount Ratio capital requirement and had tentative net capital in excess of
Risk-based capital the minimum and notification requirements.
Common Equity
Tier 1 capital 6.5 % 7.0 % $ 21,925 21.7 % $ 20,043 20.5 %
Other Regulated Subsidiaries
Tier 1 capital 8.0 % 8.5 % 21,925 21.7 % 20,043 20.5 %
Total capital 10.0 % 10.5 % 22,833 22.6 % 20,694 21.1 %
Certain other subsidiaries are also subject to various
Leverage-based capital
Tier 1 leverage 5.0 % 4.0 % $ 21,925 10.6 % $ 20,043 10.1 % regulatory capital requirements. Such subsidiaries include the
SLR 6.0 % 3.0 % 21,925 8.2 % 20,043 8.1 % following, each of which operated with capital in excess of
their respective regulatory capital requirements as of
MSPBNA’s Regulatory Capital
December 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, as applicable:
At December At December
Well- 31, 2023 31, 2022 • MSSB, a registered U.S. broker-dealer and introducing
Capitalized Required
$ in millions Requirement Ratio1 Amount Ratio Amount Ratio broker for the futures business, is subject to, respectively,
Risk-based capital the minimum net capital requirements of the SEC and
Common Equity
CFTC.
Tier 1 capital 6.5 % 7.0 % $ 15,388 25.8 % $ 15,546 27.5 %
Tier 1 capital 8.0 % 8.5 % 15,388 25.8 % 15,546 27.5 % • MSIP, a London-based broker-dealer subsidiary, is subject
Total capital 10.0 % 10.5 % 15,675 26.3 % 15,695 27.8 % to the capital requirements of the Prudential Regulation
Leverage-based capital Authority (“PRA”). MSIP is also conditionally registered
Tier 1 leverage 5.0 % 4.0 % $ 15,388 7.5 % $ 15,546 7.6 % with the SEC as a security-based swap dealer and registered
SLR 6.0 % 3.0 % 15,388 7.2 % 15,546 7.4 % with the CFTC as a swap dealer. It currently complies with
1. Required ratios are inclusive of any buffers applicable as of the date presented. home-country capital requirements in lieu of SEC and
Failure to maintain the buffers would result in restrictions on the ability to make
CFTC capital requirements pursuant to applicable
capital distributions, including the payment of dividends.
substituted compliance rules and interim no-action relief,
respectively.
Additionally, MSBNA is conditionally registered with the
• Morgan Stanley Europe Holdings SE Group (“MSEHSE
SEC as a security-based swap dealer and is registered with the
Group”), including MSESE, a Germany-based broker-
CFTC as a swap dealer. However, as MSBNA is prudentially
dealer, is subject to the capital requirements of the
regulated as a bank, its capital requirements continue to be
European Central Bank, BaFin and the German Central
determined by the OCC.
Bank. MSESE is also conditionally registered with the SEC
as a security-based swap dealer and registered with the
CFTC as a swap dealer. It currently complies with home-
country capital requirements in lieu of SEC and CFTC
capital requirements pursuant to applicable substituted
compliance rules and interim no-action relief, respectively.
• MSMS, a Tokyo-based broker-dealer subsidiary, is subject
to the capital requirements of the Financial Services
135 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Agency. MSMS is also registered with the CFTC as a swap 17. Total Equity
dealer but is currently complying with home-country capital
requirements in lieu of CFTC capital requirements pursuant Morgan Stanley Shareholders’ Equity
to interim no-action relief.
• MSCS, a U.S. entity and the Firm’s primary non-bank Preferred Stock
security-based swap dealer, is conditionally registered with
Shares
the SEC as a security-based swap dealer, registered with the Outstanding Carrying Value
SEC as an OTC derivatives dealer and registered with the At Liquidation At At
CFTC as a swap dealer. MSCS is subject to the capital $ e s in h x c a m e re i p ll i t d o p a n e t s a r , Dece 2 m 02 b 3 e r 31, P p r e e r f e S r h e a n r c e e Dece 2 m 02 b 3 e r 31, Dece 2 m 02 b 2 e r 31,
requirements of both regulators. Series
• MSCG, a U.S. entity, is registered with the CFTC as a swap A 44,000 $ 25,000 $ 1,100 $ 1,100
dealer and is subject to its capital requirements. C1 519,882 1,000 408 408
E 34,500 25,000 862 862
Certain other U.S. and non-U.S. subsidiaries of the Firm are F 34,000 25,000 850 850
subject to various securities, commodities and banking I 40,000 25,000 1,000 1,000
regulations, and capital adequacy requirements promulgated K 40,000 25,000 1,000 1,000
by the regulatory and exchange authorities of the countries in L 20,000 25,000 500 500
which they operate. These subsidiaries have also consistently M 400,000 1,000 430 430
operated with capital in excess of their local capital adequacy N 3,000 100,000 300 300
O 52,000 25,000 1,300 1,300
requirements.
P 40,000 25,000 1,000 1,000
Restrictions on Payments Total $ 8,750 $ 8,750
Shares authorized 30,000,000
The regulatory capital requirements referred to above, and 1. Series C preferred stock is held by MUFG.
certain covenants contained in various agreements governing
The Firm’s preferred stock has a preference over its common
indebtedness of the Firm, may restrict the Firm’s ability to
stock upon liquidation. The Firm’s preferred stock qualifies as
withdraw capital from its subsidiaries. The following table
and is included in Tier 1 capital in accordance with regulatory
represents net assets of consolidated subsidiaries that may be
capital requirements (see Note 16).
restricted as to the payment of cash dividends and advances to
the Parent Company.
Description of Preferred Stock as of December 31, 2023
At At Redemption
December 31, December 31, Depositary
Shares Shares Price
$ in millions 2023 2022 Series1, 2 Issued per Share per Share3 Date4
Restricted net assets $ 49,008 $ 45,896 A 44,000 1,000 $ 25,000 Currently redeemable
C5 1,160,791 N/A 1,100 Currently redeemable
E 34,500 1,000 25,000 Currently redeemable
F 34,000 1,000 25,000 January 15, 2024
I 40,000 1,000 25,000 October 15, 2024
K 40,000 1,000 25,000 April 15, 2027
L 20,000 1,000 25,000 January 15, 2025
M 400,000 N/A 1,000 September 15, 2026
N 3,000 100 100,000 October 2, 2025
O6 52,000 1,000 25,000 January 15, 2027
P7 40,000 1,000 25,000 October 15, 2027
1. All shares issued are non-cumulative. Each share has a par value of $0.01, except
Series C.
2. Dividends on Series A are based on a floating rate, and dividends on Series C, L
and O are based on a fixed rate. Dividends on all other Series are based on a fixed-
to-floating rate.
3. Series A and C are redeemable at the redemption price plus accrued and unpaid
dividends, regardless of whether dividends are actually declared, up to but
excluding the date of redemption. All other Series are redeemable at the
redemption price plus any declared and unpaid dividends, up to but excluding the
date fixed for redemption.
4. Series A and C are currently redeemable at the Firm’s option, in whole or in part,
from time to time. Series E is currently redeemable, and all other Series are
redeemable, at the Firm’s option (i) in whole or in part, from time to time, on any
dividend payment date on or after the redemption date or (ii) in whole but not in part
at any time within 90 days following a regulatory capital treatment event (as
described in the terms of that series).
5. Series C is non-voting perpetual preferred stock. Dividends on the Series C
preferred stock are payable, on a non-cumulative basis, as and if declared by the
Board of Directors, in cash, at the rate of 10% per annum of the liquidation
preference of $1,000 per share.
6. The Firm issued Series O Preferred Stock on October 25, 2021.
7. The Firm issued Series P Preferred Stock on August 2, 2022.
December 2023 Form 10-K 136Table of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Common Stock Dividends
2023 2022 2021
Rollforward of Common Stock Outstanding
$ in millions, except per Per Per Per
share data Share1 Total Share1 Total Share1 Total
in millions 2023 2022 Preferred Stock Series
Shares outstanding at beginning of period 1,675 1,772
A $ 1,522 $ 67 $ 1,061 $ 47 $ 1,022 $ 44
Treasury stock purchases1 (71) (124)
C 100 52 100 52 100 52
Other2 23 27
E 1,791 62 1,781 60 1,781 60
Shares outstanding at end of period 1,627 1,675
F 1,719 58 1,719 59 1,719 60
1. The Firm’s Board of Directors has authorized the repurchase of the Firm’s H2 — — — — 719 38
outstanding stock under a share repurchase program (“Share Repurchase I 1,594 64 1,594 64 1,594 64
Program”). In addition to the Firm’s Share Repurchase Program, Treasury stock
purchases include repurchases of common stock for employee tax withholding. J — — — — 253 15
2. Other includes net shares issued to and forfeited from employee stock trusts and K 1,463 59 1,463 59 1,463 59
issued for RSU conversions.
L 1,219 24 1,219 24 1,219 24
Share Repurchases M3 59 24 59 24 59 24
N4 9,160 27 5,300 16 5,300 16
$ in millions 2023 2022 O 1,063 55 1,063 55 236 12
Repurchases of common stock under the Firm’s P 1,625 65 736 29 — —
Share Repurchase Program $ 5,300 $ 9,865
Total Preferred stock $ 557 $ 489 $ 468
Common stock $ 3.25 $ 5,393 $ 2.95 $ 5,108 $ 2.10 $ 3,818
On June 30, 2023, the Firm announced that its Board of
Directors reauthorized a multi-year repurchase program of up 1. Common and Preferred Stock dividends are payable quarterly unless otherwise
noted.
to $20 billion of outstanding common stock, without a set
2. A notice of redemption was issued for Series H preferred stock on November 19,
expiration date, beginning in the third quarter of 2023, which 2021. Dividends declared on Series H following the issuance of the notice of
redemption were recognized as Interest expense and are excluded from the 2021
will be exercised from time to time as conditions warrant.
amounts.
3. Series M is payable semiannually until September 15, 2026 and thereafter will be
payable quarterly.
Pursuant to the Share Repurchase Program, the Firm
4. Series N was payable semiannually until March 15, 2023 and thereafter is payable
considers, among other things, business segment capital quarterly.
needs, as well as stock-based compensation and benefit plan Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (Loss)1
requirements. Share repurchases under the program will be
Pension Cash
exercised from time to time at prices the Firm deems AFS and Flow
appropriate subject to various factors, including the Firm’s $ in millions CTA Securities Other DVA Hedges Total
December 31,
capital position and market conditions. The share repurchases
2020 $ (795) $ 1,787 $ (498) $ (2,456) $ — $ (1,962)
may be effected through open market purchases or privately OCI during the
negotiated transactions, including through Rule 10b5-1 plans, period (207) (1,542) (53) 662 — (1,140)
December 31,
and may be suspended at any time.
2021 (1,002) 245 (551) (1,794) — (3,102)
OCI during the
Common Shares Outstanding for Basic and Diluted EPS period (202) (4,437) 43 1,449 (4) (3,151)
December 31,
in millions 2023 2022 2021 2022 (1,204) (4,192) (508) (345) (4) (6,253)
Weighted average common shares outstanding, OCI during the
basic 1,628 1,691 1,785 period 51 1,098 (87) (1,250) 20 (168)
Effect of dilutive RSUs and PSUs 18 22 29 December 31,
2023 $ (1,153) $ (3,094) $ (595) $ (1,595) $ 16 $ (6,421)
Weighted average common shares outstanding
and common stock equivalents, diluted 1,646 1,713 1,814
CTA—Cumulative foreign currency translation adjustments
Weighted average antidilutive common stock 1. Amounts are net of tax and noncontrolling interests.
equivalents (excluded from the computation of
diluted EPS) 2 3 —
137 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Components of Period Changes in OCI
2021
Pre-tax Income Tax After-tax Non-
2023 Gain Benefit Gain controlling
Pre-tax Income After-tax Non- $ in millions (Loss) (Provision) (Loss) Interests Net
Gain Tax Benefit Gain controlling CTA
$ in millions (Loss) (Provision) (Loss) Interests Net
OCI activity $ (140) $ (191) $ (331) $ (124) $ (207)
CTA
Reclassified to earnings — — — — —
OCI activity $ (73) $ 53 $ (20) $ (71) $ 51
Net OCI $ (140) $ (191) $ (331) $ (124) $ (207)
Reclassified to earnings — — — — —
Change in net unrealized gains (losses) on AFS securities
Net OCI $ (73) $ 53 $ (20) $ (71) $ 51
OCI activity $ (1,803) $ 422 $ (1,381) $ — $ (1,381)
Change in net unrealized gains (losses) on AFS securities
Reclassified to earnings (210) 49 (161) — (161)
OCI activity $ 1,488 $ (353) $ 1,135 $ — $ 1,135
Net OCI $ (2,013) $ 471 $ (1,542) $ — $ (1,542)
Reclassified to earnings (49) 12 (37) — (37)
Pension and other
Net OCI $ 1,439 $ (341) $ 1,098 $ — $ 1,098
OCI activity $ (101) $ 26 $ (75) $ — $ (75)
Pension and other
Reclassified to earnings 31 (9) 22 — 22
OCI activity $ (96) $ 24 $ (72) $ — $ (72)
Net OCI $ (70) $ 17 $ (53) $ — $ (53)
Reclassified to earnings (18) 3 (15) — (15)
Change in net DVA
Net OCI $ (114) $ 27 $ (87) $ — $ (87)
OCI activity $ 882 $ (213) $ 669 $ 34 $ 635
Change in net DVA
Reclassified to earnings 36 (9) 27 — 27
OCI activity $ (1,728) $ 424 $ (1,304) $ (40) $ (1,264)
Net OCI $ 918 $ (222) $ 696 $ 34 $ 662
Reclassified to earnings 19 (5) 14 — 14
Net OCI $ (1,709) $ 419 $ (1,290) $ (40) $ (1,250)
Cumulative Foreign Currency Translation Adjustments
Change in fair value of cash flow hedge derivatives
OCI activity $ 9 $ (1) $ 8 $ — $ 8
At At
Reclassified to earnings 16 (4) 12 — $ 12 December 31, December 31,
Net OCI $ 25 $ (5) $ 20 $ — $ 20 $ in millions 2023 2022
Associated with net investments in
2022 subsidiaries with a non-U.S. dollar
functional currency $ (2,917) $ (3,136)
Pre-tax Income Tax After-tax Non-
Gain Benefit Gain controlling Hedges, net of tax 1,764 1,932
$ in millions (Loss) (Provision) (Loss) Interests Net Total $ (1,153) $ (1,204)
CTA
Carrying value of net investments in non-
OCI activity $ (179) $ (217) $ (396) $ (135) $ (261) U.S. dollar functional currency subsidiaries
subject to hedges $ 18,761 $ 17,023
Reclassified to earnings — 59 59 — 59
Net OCI $ (179) $ (158) $ (337) $ (135) $ (202)
Cumulative foreign currency translation adjustments include
Change in net unrealized gains (losses) on AFS securities
gains or losses resulting from translating foreign currency
OCI activity $ (5,720) $ 1,337 $ (4,383) $ — $ (4,383)
Reclassified to earnings (70) 16 (54) — (54) financial statements from their respective functional
Net OCI $ (5,790) $ 1,353 $ (4,437) $ — $ (4,437) currencies to U.S. dollars, net of hedge gains or losses and
Pension and other related tax effects. The Firm uses foreign currency contracts
OCI activity $ 38 $ (13) $ 25 $ — $ 25 to manage the currency exposure relating to its net
Reclassified to earnings 22 (4) 18 — 18 investments in non-U.S. dollar functional currency
Net OCI $ 60 $ (17) $ 43 $ — $ 43 subsidiaries and determines the amount of exposure to hedge
Change in net DVA on a pre-tax basis. The Firm may also elect not to hedge its
OCI activity $ 1,982 $ (480) $ 1,502 $ 53 $ 1,449 net investments in certain foreign operations due to market
Reclassified to earnings — — — — — conditions or other reasons, including the availability of
Net OCI $ 1,982 $ (480) $ 1,502 $ 53 $ 1,449
various currency contracts at acceptable costs. Information
Change in fair value of cash flow hedge derivatives
relating to the effects on cumulative foreign currency
OCI activity $ (4) $ — $ (4) $ — $ (4)
translation adjustments that resulted from the translation of
Reclassified to earnings — — — — —
foreign currency financial statements and from gains and
Net OCI $ (4) $ — $ (4) $ — $ (4)
losses from hedges of the Firm’s net investments in non-U.S.
dollar functional currency subsidiaries is summarized in the
previous table.
December 2023 Form 10-K 138Table of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
18. Interest Income and Interest Expense Stock-Based Compensation Expense
$ in millions 2023 2022 2021
$ in millions 2023 2022 2021 RSUs $ 1,607 $ 1,827 $ 1,834
Interest income PSUs 91 40 251
Cash and cash equivalents1 $ 3,408 $ 914 $ 7 ESPP 11 8 —
Investment securities 3,992 3,066 2,759 Total $ 1,709 $ 1,875 $ 2,085
Loans 12,424 6,988 4,209 Retirement-eligible awards1 $ 178 $ 176 $ 192
Securities purchased under agreements to
resell2 7,762 2,188 (181) 1. Total expense includes stock-based compensation anticipated to be awarded in
Securities borrowed3 5,191 1,020 (1,017) January of the following year that does not contain a future service requirement.
Trading assets, net of Trading liabilities 4,488 2,484 2,038
Tax Benefit Related to Stock-Based Compensation Expense
Customer receivables and Other1 13,016 4,935 1,596
Total interest income $ 50,281 $ 21,595 $ 9,411 $ in millions 2023 2022 2021
Interest expense Tax benefit1 $ 382 $ 427 $ 432
Deposits $ 8,216 $ 1,825 $ 409
1. Excludes income tax consequences related to employee share-based award
Borrowings 11,437 5,054 2,725 conversions.
Securities sold under agreements to
repurchase4 6,737 1,760 93 Unrecognized Compensation Cost Related to Stock-Based
Securities loaned5 784 503 401 Awards Granted
Customer payables and Other6 14,877 3,126 (2,262)
At
Total interest expense $ 42,051 $ 12,268 $ 1,366
December 31,
Net interest $ 8,230 $ 9,327 $ 8,045 $ in millions 20231
To be recognized in:
1. In the fourth quarter of 2023, interest bearing Cash and cash equivalents and
related interest were presented separately for the first time. The prior period 2024 $ 560
amounts for Customer receivables and Other have been disaggregated to exclude 2025 238
Cash and cash equivalents to align with the current presentation.
2. Includes interest paid on Securities purchased under agreements to resell. Thereafter 66
3. Includes fees paid on Securities borrowed. Total $ 864
4. Includes interest received on Securities sold under agreements to repurchase.
5. Includes fees received on Securities loaned. 1. Amounts do not include forfeitures or 2023 performance year compensation
6. Includes fees received from Equity Financing customers related to their short awarded in January 2024, which will begin to be amortized in 2024.
transactions, which can be under either margin or securities lending arrangements.
In connection with awards under its stock-based
Interest income and Interest expense are classified in the
compensation plans, the Firm is authorized to issue shares of
income statement based on the nature of the instrument and
common stock held in treasury or newly issued shares.
related market conventions. When included as a component of
the instrument’s fair value, interest is included within Trading
The Firm generally uses treasury shares, if available, to
revenues or Investments revenues. Otherwise, it is included
deliver shares to employees or employee stock trusts and has
within Interest income or Interest expense.
an ongoing repurchase authorization that includes repurchases
in connection with awards under its stock-based
Accrued Interest
compensation plans.
At At
December 31, December 31,
$ in millions 2023 2022 Common Shares Available for Future Awards under Stock-
Customer and other receivables $ 4,206 $ 4,139 Based Compensation Plans
Customer and other payables 4,360 4,273 At
December 31,
in millions 2023
19. Deferred Compensation Plans and Carried
Shares 121
Interest Compensation
See Note 17 for additional information on the Firm’s Share
Stock-Based Compensation Plans Repurchase Program.
Certain current and former employees of the Firm participate Restricted Stock Units
in the Firm’s stock-based compensation plans. These plans
include RSUs, PSUs and an ESPP. RSUs are subject to vesting over time, generally one to seven
years from the date of award, contingent upon continued
employment and subject to restrictions on sale, transfer or
assignment until conversion to common stock. All or a
portion of an award may be forfeited if employment is
terminated before the end of the relevant vesting period or
canceled after the relevant vesting period in certain situations.
Recipients of RSUs may have voting rights, at the Firm’s
discretion, and generally receive dividend equivalents if the
awards vest.
139 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Vested and Unvested RSU Activity PSU Awards - Fair Value on Award Date
2023
2023 2022 2021
Weighted
Average MS Average ROTCE/ Relative ROTCE1 $ 85.76 $ 100.12 $ 74.87
Number of Award Date
shares in millions Shares Fair Value MS Relative TSR — 102.17 83.70
RSUs at beginning of period 63 $ 76.31 1. Weighted average price on award date
Awarded 19 93.55
The MS Relative TSR fair values on the award date were
Conversions to common stock (21) 61.23
estimated using a Monte Carlo simulation and the following
Forfeited (2) 88.02
RSUs at end of period1 59 $ 86.92 assumptions.
Aggregate intrinsic value of RSUs at end of period
(dollars in millions) $ 5,523 Monte Carlo Simulation Assumptions
Weighted average award date fair value
Expected
RSUs awarded in 2022 96.61
Risk-Free Stock Price Correlation
RSUs awarded in 2021 77.28 Interest Rate Volatility Coefficient
Award year
1. At December 31, 2023, the weighted average remaining term until delivery for the
outstanding RSUs was approximately 1.1 years. 2022 1.3 % 38.9 % 0.91
2021 0.2 % 39.0 % 0.92
Unvested RSU Activity
2023 The risk-free interest rate was determined based on the yields
Weighted available on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues. The expected
Average
Number of Award Date stock price volatility was determined using historical
shares in millions Shares Fair Value
volatility. The correlation coefficient was developed based on
Unvested RSUs at beginning of period 35 $ 83.41
historical price data of the Firm and the S&P 500 Financials
Awarded 19 93.55
Sector Index. The model uses an expected dividend yield
Vested (25) 84.28
equivalent to reinvesting dividends.
Forfeited (1) 89.44
Unvested RSUs at end of period1 28 $ 89.16
Deferred Cash-Based Compensation Plans
1. Unvested RSUs represent awards where recipients have yet to satisfy either the
explicit vesting terms or retirement-eligible requirements.
DCP generally provide a return to the plan participants based
Fair Value of RSU Activity1 upon the performance of each participant’s referenced
investments.
$ in millions 2023 2022 2021
Conversions to common stock $ 2,019 $ 2,301 $ 1,539 Deferred Cash-Based Compensation Expense
Vested 2,260 2,433 1,647
$ in millions 2023 2022 2021
1. Fair value of converted stock is based on the share price at conversion. Fair value of
vested stock is based on the share price at date of vesting. Deferred cash-based awards $ 693 $ 761 $ 810
Return on referenced investments 668 (716) 526
Performance-Based Stock Units Total $ 1,361 $ 45 $ 1,336
Retirement-eligible awards1 $ 259 $ 264 $ 253
PSUs vest and convert to shares of common stock only if the
1. Total expense includes deferred cash-based compensation anticipated to be
Firm satisfies, over a three-year performance period,
awarded in January of the following year that does not contain a future service
performance goals that are determined on the award date. The requirement.
number of PSUs that may vest ranges from 0% to 150% of
Carried Interest Compensation
the target award, based on the Firm’s level of achievement of
the specified performance goals. One-half of a PSU award is The Firm generally recognizes compensation expense for any
earned based on the Firm’s average return on tangible portion of carried interest (both realized and unrealized) that
common equity (“MS Average ROTCE”) over the is allocated to employees.
performance period. The other half of a PSU award is earned
based on the Firm’s total shareholder return, relative to the Carried Interest Compensation Expense
total shareholder return of the S&P 500 Financials Sector
$ in millions 2023 2022 2021
Index (“MS Relative TSR”) for awards granted prior to 2023,
Expense $ 44 $ 225 $ 346
or for PSU awards granted in 2023 based on the MS Average
ROTCE relative to the Return on Tangible Common Equity
of each member of the defined comparison group (“MS
Relative ROTCE”). PSUs have vesting, conversion and
cancellation provisions that are generally similar to those of
RSUs. At December 31, 2023, approximately 2.8 million
PSUs at target were outstanding.
December 2023 Form 10-K 140Table of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
20. Employee Benefit Plans gains and losses and prior service credit over the average
remaining service period of active participants.
Pension Plans
Weighted Average Assumptions Used to Determine Net
Net Periodic Benefit Expense (Income) Periodic Benefit Expense (Income)
Pension Plans
Pension Plans
2023 2022 2021
$ in millions 2023 2022 2021
Discount rate 4.93 % 2.80 % 2.43 %
Service cost, benefits earned during the
period $ 20 $ 19 $ 19 Expected long-term rate of return on plan
assets 3.54 % 1.71 % 1.42 %
Interest cost on projected benefit obligation 140 111 104
Expected return on plan assets (99) (56) (48)
The accounting for pension plans involves certain
Net amortization of prior service cost 1 1 1
assumptions and estimates. The expected long-term rate of
Amortization of net gains and losses (9) 25 34
return for the U.S. Qualified Plan was estimated by
Plan settlements $ 2 $ — $ —
computing a weighted average of the underlying long-term
Net periodic benefit expense $ 55 $ 100 $ 110
expected returns based on the investment managers’ target
allocations.
Certain current and former U.S. employees of the Firm and its
U.S. affiliates who were hired before July 1, 2007 are covered
Benefit Obligation and Funded Status
by the U.S. pension plan, a non-contributory defined benefit
pension plan that is qualified under Section 401(a) of the Rollforward of the Projected Benefit Obligation and Fair Value
Internal Revenue Code (“U.S. Qualified Plan”). The U.S. of Plan Assets
Qualified Plan has ceased future benefit accruals. Pension Plans
$ in millions 2023 2022
Unfunded supplementary plans (“Supplemental Plans”) cover Rollforward of projected benefit obligation
certain executives. Liabilities for benefits payable under the Benefit obligation at beginning of year $ 2,907 $ 4,081
Supplemental Plans are accrued by the Firm and are funded Service cost 20 19
when paid. The Morgan Stanley Supplemental Executive Interest cost 140 111
Retirement and Excess Plan (“SEREP”), a non-contributory Actuarial (gain) loss1 79 (1,064)
defined benefit plan that is not qualified under Section 401(a) Plan settlements (13) (2)
of the Internal Revenue Code, has ceased future benefit Benefits paid (164) (196)
accruals. Other2 6 (42)
Projected benefit obligation at end of year $ 2,975 $ 2,907
Certain of the Firm’s non-U.S. subsidiaries also have defined Rollforward of fair value of plan assets
benefit pension plans covering their eligible current and Fair value of plan assets at beginning of year $ 2,416 $ 3,605
Actual return on plan assets 78 (982)
former employees.
Employer contributions 89 37
The Firm’s pension plans generally provide pension benefits Benefits paid (164) (196)
Plan settlements (13) (2)
that are based on each employee’s years of credited service
Other2 16 (46)
and on compensation levels specified in the plans.
Fair value of plan assets at end of year $ 2,422 $ 2,416
Funded (unfunded) status $ (553) $ (491)
Rollforward of Pre-tax AOCI
Amounts recognized in the balance sheet
Pension Plans Assets $ 84 $ 75
$ in millions 2023 2022 2021 Liabilities (637) (566)
Beginning balance $ (716) $ (768) $ (691) Net amount recognized $ (553) $ (491)
Net gain (loss) (100) 26 (112)
1. Primarily reflects the impact of year-over-year discount rate fluctuations.
Amortization of prior service cost 1 1 1 2. Includes the impact of foreign currency exchange rate changes and plan
Amortization of net gains and losses (9) 25 34 curtailments.
Plan settlements and curtailments 3 — —
Accumulated Benefit Obligation
Changes recognized in OCI (105) 52 (77)
Ending balance $ (821) $ (716) $ (768) At At
December 31, December 31,
$ in millions 2023 2022
The Firm generally amortizes into net periodic benefit
Pension plans $ 2,956 $ 2,891
expense (income) the unrecognized net gains and losses
exceeding 10% of the greater of the projected benefit
obligation or the market-related value of plan assets. The U.S.
pension plans amortize the unrecognized net gains and losses
over the average life expectancy of participants. The
remaining plans generally amortize the unrecognized net
141 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Pension Plans with Projected Benefit Obligations in Excess
At December 31, 2022
of the Fair Value of Plan Assets
$ in millions Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
At At Assets
December 31, December 31,
Cash and cash equivalents $ 4 $ — $ — $ 4
$ in millions 2023 2022
U.S. government and agency
Projected benefit obligation $ 2,821 $ 2,746
securities 1,788 267 — 2,055
Accumulated benefit obligation 2,803 2,731
Corporate and other debt—CDO — — — —
Fair value of plan assets 2,184 2,180
Derivative contracts — (2) — (2)
Other investments — — 64 64
The pension plans included in the table above may differ Other receivables1 — 21 — 21
based on their funding status as of December 31 of each year. Total $ 1,792 $ 286 $ 64 $ 2,142
Assets Measured at NAV
Weighted Average Assumptions Used to Determine Projected Commingled trust funds:
Benefit Obligation
Money market 44
Pension Plans Foreign funds:
At At
Fixed income 55
December 31, December 31,
2023 2022 Liquidity 20
Discount rate 4.75 % 4.93 % Targeted cash flow 158
Total $ 277
The discount rates used to determine the benefit obligation Liabilities
were selected by the Firm, in consultation with its Other payables1 — (3) — (3)
independent actuary. The U.S. pension plans use a pension Total liabilities $ — $ (3) $ — $ (3)
discount yield curve based on the characteristics of the plans, Fair value of plan assets $ 2,416
each determined independently. The pension discount yield 1. Other receivables and other payables are valued at their carrying value, which
curve represents spot discount yields based on duration approximates fair value.
implicit in a representative broad-based Aa-rated corporate
Rollforward of Level 3 Plan Assets
bond universe of high-quality fixed income investments. For
all non-U.S. pension plans, the assumed discount rates are $ in millions 2023 2022
based on the nature of liabilities, local economic Balance at beginning of period $ 64 $ 65
environments and available bond indices. Realized and unrealized gains 2 —
Purchases, sales and settlements, net 5 (1)
Plan Assets Balance at end of period $ 71 $ 64
Fair Value of Plan Assets There were no transfers between levels during 2023 and 2022.
At December 31, 2023 The U.S. Qualified Plan assets represent 87% and 88% of the
$ in millions Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total Firm’s total pension plan assets at December 31, 2023 and
Assets
December 2022, respectively. The U.S. Qualified Plan uses a
Cash and cash equivalents $ 6 $ — $ — $ 6
combination of active and risk-controlled fixed income
U.S. government and agency
securities 1,800 230 — 2,030 investment strategies. The fixed income asset allocation
Corporate and other debt—CDO — — — — consists primarily of fixed income securities and related
Derivative contracts — 3 — 3 derivative instruments designed to approximate the expected
Other investments — — 71 71 cash flows of the plan’s liabilities to help reduce plan
Other receivables1 1 15 — 16 exposure to interest rate variation and to better align assets
Total $ 1,807 $ 248 $ 71 $ 2,126 with the obligation. The longer-duration fixed income
Assets Measured at NAV allocation is expected to help protect the plan’s funded status
Commingled trust funds: and maintain the stability of plan contributions over the long
Money market 64 run. The investment portfolio performance is assessed by
Foreign funds:
comparing actual investment performance with changes in the
Fixed income 62
estimated present value of the U.S. Qualified Plan’s benefit
Liquidity 171
obligation.
Targeted cash flow 14
Total $ 311
Derivative instruments are permitted in the U.S. Qualified
Liabilities
Plan’s investment portfolio only to the extent that they
Other payables1 (1) (14) — (15)
comply with all of the plan’s investment policy guidelines and
Total liabilities $ (1) $ (14) $ — $ (15)
are consistent with the plan’s risk and return objectives.
Fair value of plan assets $ 2,422
As a fundamental operating principle, any restrictions on the
underlying assets apply to the respective derivative product.
This includes percentage allocations and credit quality.
Derivatives are used solely for the purpose of enhancing
December 2023 Form 10-K 142Table of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
investment returns in the underlying assets and not to 401(k) Plans
circumvent portfolio restrictions.
$ in millions 2023 2022 2021
Expense $ 397 $ 355 $ 357
Plan assets are measured at fair value using valuation
techniques that are consistent with the valuation techniques
U.S. employees meeting certain eligibility requirements may
applied to the Firm’s major categories of assets and liabilities
participate in the Firm’s 401(k) plan.
as described in Notes 2 and 4. OTC derivative contracts
consist of investments in interest rate swaps and total return
Eligible employees receive discretionary 401(k) matching
swaps. Other investments consist of insurance contracts held
cash contributions as determined annually by the Firm. The
by non-U.S.-based plans. The insurance contracts are valued
Firm generally matched eligible employee contributions up to
based on the premium reserve of the insurer for a guarantee
the IRS limit at 4%, or 5% up to a certain compensation level,
that the insurer has given to the employee benefit plan that
in 2023 and 2022. Eligible employees with eligible pay less
approximates fair value. The insurance contracts are
than or equal to $100,000 also received a fixed contribution
categorized in Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy.
equal to 2% of eligible pay. Contributions are invested among
available funds according to each participant’s investment
Commingled trust funds are privately offered funds regulated,
direction and are included in the Firm’s 401(k) expense.
supervised and subject to periodic examination by a U.S.
federal or state agency and available to institutional clients.
Non-U.S. Defined Contribution Pension Plans
The trust must be maintained for the collective investment or
reinvestment of assets contributed to it from U.S. tax- $ in millions 2023 2022 2021
qualified employee benefit plans maintained by more than one Expense $ 173 $ 163 $ 149
employer or controlled group of corporations. The sponsor of
the commingled trust funds values the funds based on the fair The Firm maintains separate defined contribution pension
value of the underlying securities. Commingled trust funds plans that cover eligible employees of certain non-U.S.
are redeemable at NAV at the measurement date or in the near subsidiaries. Under such plans, contributions are generally
future. determined based on a fixed rate of base salary with certain
vesting requirements.
Some non-U.S.-based plans hold foreign funds that consist of
investments in fixed income funds and liquidity funds. Fixed
income funds are designed to provide a series of fixed annual
cash flows achieved by investing in government and corporate
bonds. Liquidity funds place a high priority on capital
preservation, stable value and a high liquidity of assets.
Foreign funds are readily redeemable at NAV.
The Firm generally considers the NAV of commingled trust
funds and foreign funds provided by the fund manager to be
the best estimate of fair value.
Expected Contributions
The Firm’s policy is to fund at least the amount sufficient to
meet minimum funding requirements under applicable
employee benefit and tax laws. At December 31, 2023, the
Firm expected to contribute approximately $40 million to its
pension plans in 2024 based upon the plans’ current funded
status and expected asset return assumptions for 2024.
Expected Future Benefit Payments
At December 31, 2023
$ in millions Pension Plans
2024 $ 154
2025 160
2026 167
2027 174
2028 180
2029-2033 967
143 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
21. Income Taxes Deferred Tax Assets and Liabilities
At At
Components of Provision for Income Taxes December 31, December 31,
$ in millions 2023 2022
$ in millions 2023 2022 2021 Gross deferred tax assets
Current Net operating loss and tax credit
carryforwards $ 255 $ 288
U.S.:
Employee compensation and benefit plans 2,636 2,487
Federal $ 1,190 $ 2,518 $ 2,554
Allowance for credit losses and other
State and local 542 442 475 reserves 755 595
Non-U.S.: Valuation of net trading inventory,
Brazil1 437 24 197 investments and receivables 1,897 1,743
Other 78 35
U.K. 267 405 551
Total deferred tax assets 5,621 5,148
Japan 139 105 105
Less: Deferred tax assets valuation
Hong Kong 39 29 192 allowance 211 205
Other2 432 236 470 Deferred tax assets after valuation allowance $ 5,410 $ 4,943
Total $ 3,046 $ 3,759 $ 4,544 Gross deferred tax liabilities
Fixed assets 772 807
Deferred Intangibles and goodwill 2,003 2,019
U.S.: Total deferred tax liabilities $ 2,775 $ 2,826
Federal $ (295) $ (803) $ (11) Net deferred tax assets $ 2,635 $ 2,117
State and local (59) (142) 33
Non-U.S.:
Deferred income taxes reflect the net tax effects of temporary
Brazil1 (43) 25 38
differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of
U.K. 12 55 (37)
assets and liabilities and are measured using the enacted tax
Japan (13) 20 4
rates and laws that will be in effect when such differences are
Hong Kong (2) (1) (9)
expected to reverse.
Other2 (63) (3) (14)
Total $ (463) $ (849) $ 4
The Firm believes the recognized net deferred tax assets (after
Provision for income taxes $ 2,583 $ 2,910 $ 4,548
valuation allowance) at December 31, 2023 are more likely
1. In 2023, Brazil was presented separately for the first time. The prior period amounts than not to be realized based on expectations as to future
for Other have been disaggregated to exclude Brazil to align with the current
presentation. taxable income in the jurisdictions in which it operates.
2. Other Non-U.S. tax provisions for 2023, 2022 and 2021 primarily include, Singapore
and Germany.
The earnings of certain foreign subsidiaries and affiliates are
Reconciliation of the U.S. Federal Statutory Income Tax Rate indefinitely reinvested due to regulatory and other capital
to the Effective Income Tax Rate requirements in foreign jurisdictions. As of December 31,
2023 and December 31, 2022, the unrecognized deferred tax
2023 2022 2021
liability attributable to indefinitely reinvested earnings is $302
U.S. federal statutory income tax rate 21.0 % 21.0 % 21.0 %
million and $429 million, respectively.
U.S. state and local income taxes, net of
U.S. federal income tax benefits 3.4 1.8 2.1
Domestic tax credits and tax exempt income (1.3) (0.9) (0.6) Rollforward of Unrecognized Tax Benefits
Non-U.S. earnings 1.9 0.6 1.3
Employee share-based awards (1.5) (1.7) (0.6) $ in millions 2023 2022 2021
Non-taxable income1 (2.3) (0.8) (0.4) Balance at beginning of period $ 1,129 $ 971 $ 755
Other 0.7 0.7 0.3 Increases based on tax positions related to
the current period 147 256 201
Effective income tax rate 21.9 % 20.7 % 23.1 %
Increases based on tax positions related to
prior periods 141 64 74
1. In 2023, Non-taxable income was presented separately for the first time. The prior
period amounts for Non-U.S. earnings and Other have been disaggregated to Decreases based on tax positions related to
prior periods (73) (134) (37)
exclude Non-taxable income to align with the current presentation.
Decreases related to settlements with taxing
authorities (79) (6) (10)
Decreases related to lapse of statute of
limitations (21) (22) (12)
Balance at end of period $ 1,244 $ 1,129 $ 971
Net unrecognized tax benefits1 $ 1,090 $ 1,007 $ 860
1. Represent ending unrecognized tax benefits adjusted for the impact of the federal
benefit of state issues, competent authority arrangements and foreign tax credit
offsets. If recognized, these net benefits would favorably impact the effective tax
rate in future periods.
It is reasonably possible that significant changes in the
balance of unrecognized tax benefits may occur within the
next 12 months. At this time, however, it is not possible to
reasonably estimate the expected change to the total amount
December 2023 Form 10-K 144Table of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
of unrecognized tax benefits and the impact on the Firm’s Selected Financial Information by Business Segment
effective tax rate over the next 12 months.
2023
$ in millions IS WM IM I/E Total
Interest Expense (Benefit) Associated with Unrecognized Tax
Investment banking $ 4,578 $ 454 $ — $ (84) $ 4,948
Benefits, Net of Federal and State Income Tax Benefits
Trading 14,468 823 (59) 31 15,263
$ in millions 2023 2022 2021 Investments 177 62 334 — 573
Recognized in income statement $ 65 $ 39 $ 14 Commissions and fees1 2,540 2,279 — (282) 4,537
Accrued at end of period 237 175 142 Asset management1, 2 596 14,019 5,231 (229) 19,617
Other 480 513 (7) (11) 975
Interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits are Total non-interest revenues 22,839 18,150 5,499 (575) 45,913
recognized as a component of the provision for income taxes. Interest income 36,815 15,015 135 (1,684) 50,281
Interest expense 36,594 6,897 264 (1,704) 42,051
Penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits for the years
Net interest 221 8,118 (129) 20 8,230
mentioned above were immaterial.
Net revenues $ 23,060 $ 26,268 $ 5,370 $ (555) $ 54,143
Provision for credit losses $ 401 $ 131 $ — $ — $ 532
Earliest Tax Year Subject to Examination in Major Tax
Jurisdictions Compensation and benefits 8,369 13,972 2,217 — 24,558
Non-compensation expenses 9,814 5,635 2,311 (520) 17,240
Jurisdiction Tax Year Total non-interest expenses $ 18,183 $ 19,607 $ 4,528 $ (520) $ 41,798
U.S. 2017 Income before provision for
New York State and New York City 2010 income taxes $ 4,476 $ 6,530 $ 842 $ (35) $ 11,813
U.K. 2014 Provision for income taxes 884 1,508 199 (8) 2,583
Japan 2019 Net income 3,592 5,022 643 (27) 9,230
Net income applicable to
Hong Kong 2017
noncontrolling interests 139 — 4 — 143
Net income applicable to
The Firm is routinely under examination by the IRS and other Morgan Stanley $ 3,453 $ 5,022 $ 639 $ (27) $ 9,087
tax authorities in certain countries, such as Japan and the
2022
U.K., and in states and localities in which it has significant $ in millions IS WM IM I/E Total
business operations, such as New York. Investment banking $ 5,235 $ 438 $ — $ (74) $ 5,599
Trading 14,318 (432) (11) 53 13,928
The Firm believes that the resolution of these tax Investments (156) 51 120 — 15
examinations will not have a material effect on the annual Commissions and fees1 2,756 2,467 — (285) 4,938
financial statements, although a resolution could have a Asset management1, 2 580 13,872 5,332 (206) 19,578
material impact in the income statement and on the effective Other (295) 592 (2) (12) 283
tax rate for any period in which such resolutions occur. Total non-interest revenues 22,438 16,988 5,439 (524) 44,341
Interest income 13,276 9,579 56 (1,316) 21,595
22. Segment, Geographic and Revenue Interest expense 11,321 2,150 120 (1,323) 12,268
Information Net interest 1,955 7,429 (64) 7 9,327
Net revenues $ 24,393 $ 24,417 $ 5,375 $ (517) $ 53,668
Provision for credit losses $ 211 $ 69 $ — $ — $ 280
The Firm structures its segments primarily based upon the
Compensation and benefits 8,246 12,534 2,273 — 23,053
nature of the financial products and services provided to
Non-compensation expenses 9,221 5,231 2,295 (501) 16,246
customers and its management organization. The Firm
Total non-interest expenses $ 17,467 $ 17,765 $ 4,568 $ (501) $ 39,299
provides a wide range of financial products and services to its
Income before provision for
customers in each of its business segments: Institutional income taxes $ 6,715 $ 6,583 $ 807 $ (16) $ 14,089
Securities, Wealth Management and Investment Management. Provision for income taxes 1,308 1,444 162 (4) 2,910
For a further discussion of the business segments, see Note 1. Net income 5,407 5,139 645 (12) 11,179
Net income applicable to
noncontrolling interests 165 — (15) — 150
Revenues and expenses directly associated with each
Net income applicable to
respective business segment are included in determining its Morgan Stanley $ 5,242 $ 5,139 $ 660 $ (12) $ 11,029
operating results. Other revenues and expenses that are not
directly attributable to a particular business segment are
generally allocated based on each business segment’s
respective net revenues, non-interest expenses or other
relevant measures.
As a result of revenues and expenses from transactions with
other operating segments being treated as transactions with
external parties for purposes of segment disclosures, the Firm
includes an Intersegment Eliminations category to reconcile
the business segment results to the consolidated results.
145 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Investment Management Investments Revenues—Net
2021
Cumulative Unrealized Carried Interest
$ in millions IS WM IM I/E Total
Investment banking $ 10,272 $ 822 $ — $ (100) $ 10,994
At At
Trading 12,353 418 (53) 92 12,810
December 31, December 31,
Investments 607 48 721 — 1,376 $ in millions 2023 2022
Commissions and fees1 2,878 3,019 1 (377) 5,521 Net cumulative unrealized performance-
Asset management1,2 583 13,966 5,576 (158) 19,967 based fees at risk of reversing $ 787 $ 819
Other 495 577 (20) (10) 1,042
Total non-interest revenues 27,188 18,850 6,225 (553) 51,710 The Firm’s portion of net cumulative performance-based fees
Interest income 3,752 5,821 31 (193) 9,411 in the form of unrealized carried interest, for which the Firm
Interest expense 1,107 428 36 (205) 1,366 is not obligated to pay compensation, is at risk of reversing
Net interest 2,645 5,393 (5) 12 8,045 when the return in certain funds fall below specified
Net revenues $ 29,833 $ 24,243 $ 6,220 $ (541) $ 59,755 performance targets. See Note 14 for information regarding
Provision for credit losses $ (7) $ 11 $ — $ — $ 4 general partner guarantees, which include potential
Compensation and benefits 9,165 13,090 2,373 — 24,628 obligations to return performance fee distributions previously
Non-compensation expenses 8,861 4,961 2,169 (536) 15,455 received.
Total non-interest expenses $ 18,026 $ 18,051 $ 4,542 $ (536) $ 40,083
Income before provision for
Investment Management Asset Management Revenues—
income taxes $ 11,814 $ 6,181 $ 1,678 $ (5) $ 19,668
Reduction of Fees Due to Fee Waivers
Provision for income taxes 2,746 1,447 356 (1) 4,548
Net income 9,068 4,734 1,322 (4) 15,120 $ in millions 2023 2022 2021
Net income applicable to Fee waivers $ 93 $ 211 $ 516
noncontrolling interests 111 — (25) — 86
Net income applicable to
Morgan Stanley $ 8,957 $ 4,734 $ 1,347 $ (4) $ 15,034 The Firm waives a portion of its fees in the Investment
Management business segment from certain registered money
1. Substantially all revenues are from contracts with customers.
2. Includes certain fees that may relate to services performed in prior periods. market funds that comply with the requirements of Rule 2a-7
of the Investment Company Act of 1940.
Detail of Investment Banking Revenues
$ in millions 2023 2022 2021 Certain Other Fee Waivers
Institutional Securities—Advisory $ 2,244 $ 2,946 $ 3,487
Institutional Securities—Underwriting 2,334 2,289 6,785 Separately, the Firm’s employees, including its senior
Firm Investment banking revenues from officers, may participate on the same terms and conditions as
contracts with customers 91 % 90 % 91 %
other investors in certain funds that the Firm sponsors
primarily for client investment, and the Firm may waive or
Trading Revenues by Product Type
lower applicable fees and charges for its employees.
$ in millions 2023 2022 2021
Interest rate $ 4,646 $ 2,808 $ 740 Other Expenses—Transaction Taxes
Foreign exchange 1,054 1,585 1,008
$ in millions 2023 2022 2021
Equity1 8,929 7,515 7,331
Transaction taxes $ 866 $ 910 $ 969
Commodity and other 1,624 1,466 2,599
Credit (990) 554 1,132
Transaction taxes are composed of securities transaction taxes
Total $ 15,263 $ 13,928 $ 12,810
and stamp duties, which are levied on the sale or purchase of
1. Dividend income is included within equity contracts. securities listed on recognized stock exchanges in certain
markets. These taxes are imposed mainly on trades of equity
The previous table summarizes realized and unrealized gains
securities in Asia and EMEA. Similar transaction taxes are
and losses primarily related to the Firm’s Trading assets and
levied on trades of listed derivative instruments in certain
liabilities, from derivative and non-derivative financial
countries.
instruments, included in Trading revenues in the income
statement. The Firm generally utilizes financial instruments
across a variety of product types in connection with its
market-making and related risk management strategies. The
trading revenues presented in the table are not representative
of the manner in which the Firm manages its business
activities and are prepared in a manner similar to the
presentation of trading revenues for regulatory reporting
purposes.
December 2023 Form 10-K 146Table of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Net Revenues by Region Assets by Business Segment
At At
$ in millions 2023 2022 2021 December 31, December 31,
Americas $ 41,651 $ 40,117 $ 44,605 $ in millions 2023 2022
EMEA 6,058 6,811 7,699 Institutional Securities $ 810,506 $ 789,837
Asia 6,434 6,740 7,451 Wealth Management 365,168 373,305
Total $ 54,143 $ 53,668 $ 59,755 Investment Management 18,019 17,089
Total1 $ 1,193,693 $ 1,180,231
Income before Provision for Income Taxes
1. Parent assets have been fully allocated to the business segments.
$ in millions 2023 2022 2021 Total Assets by Region
U.S. $ 8,334 $ 9,363 $ 14,082
Non-U.S.1 3,479 4,726 5,586 At At
Total $ 11,813 $ 14,089 $ 19,668 December 31, December 31,
$ in millions 2023 2022
1. Non-U.S. income is defined as income generated from operations located outside Americas $ 832,714 $ 853,228
the U.S.
EMEA 218,923 197,397
The Firm operates in both U.S. and non-U.S. markets. The Asia 142,056 129,606
Total $ 1,193,693 $ 1,180,231
Firm’s non-U.S. business activities are principally conducted
and managed through EMEA and Asia locations. The net
23. Parent Company
revenues disclosed in the previous table reflect the regional
view of the Firm’s consolidated net revenues on a managed
Parent Company Only—Condensed Income Statement and
basis, based on the following methodology:
Comprehensive Income Statement
Institutional Securities: Client location for advisory and $ in millions 2023 2022 2021
equity underwriting, syndicate desk location for debt Revenues
underwriting, trading desk location for sales and trading. Dividends from bank subsidiaries $ 5,770 $ 2,875 $ —
Dividends from BHC and non-bank subsidiaries 6,812 8,661 8,898
Wealth Management: Americas, where representatives Total dividends from subsidiaries 12,582 11,536 8,898
operate. Trading (775) (1,143) 229
Other (31) 170 4
Investment Management: Client location, except certain Total non-interest revenues 11,776 10,563 9,131
closed-end funds, which are based on asset location. Interest income 13,596 5,805 2,648
Interest expense 13,618 6,162 2,822
Revenues Recognized from Prior Services Net interest (22) (357) (174)
Net revenues 11,754 10,206 8,957
$ in millions 2023 2022 2021
Non-interest expenses 287 252 443
Non-interest revenues $ 1,778 $ 2,538 $ 2,391
Income before income taxes 11,467 9,954 8,514
Provision for (benefit from) income taxes (520) (456) (203)
The previous table includes revenues from contracts with
Net income before undistributed gain of
customers recognized where some or all services were subsidiaries 11,987 10,410 8,717
performed in prior periods. These revenues primarily include Undistributed (loss) gain of subsidiaries (2,900) 619 6,317
investment banking advisory fees. Net income 9,087 11,029 15,034
Other comprehensive income (loss), net of
tax:
Receivables from Contracts with Customers
Foreign currency translation adjustments 51 (202) (207)
At At Change in net unrealized gains (losses) on
available-for-sale securities 1,098 (4,437) (1,542)
December 31, December 31,
$ in millions 2023 2022 Pensions and other (87) 43 (53)
Customer and other receivables $ 2,339 $ 2,577 Change in net debt valuation adjustment (1,250) 1,449 662
Net change in cash flow hedges 20 (4) —
Receivables from contracts with customers, which are Comprehensive income $ 8,919 $ 7,878 $ 13,894
included within Customer and other receivables in the balance Net income $ 9,087 $ 11,029 $ 15,034
sheet, arise when the Firm has both recorded revenues and the Preferred stock dividends and other 557 489 468
Earnings applicable to Morgan Stanley
right per the contract to bill the customer.
common shareholders $ 8,530 $ 10,540 $ 14,566
147 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Parent Company Only—Condensed Balance Sheet Parent Company Only—Condensed Cash Flow Statement
At At $ in millions 2023 2022 2021
December 31, December 31,
Net cash provided by (used for) operating
$ in millions, except share data 2023 2022 activities $ 24,914 $ (13,064) $ 4,257
Assets Cash flows from investing activities
Cash and cash equivalents $ 16,881 $ 25,333 Proceeds from (payments for):
Trading assets at fair value 4,160 10,391 AFS securities:
Investment securities: Purchases (9,362) (1,855) (6,275)
Available-for-sale at fair value (amortized Proceeds from sales 300 676 2,611
cost of $22,164 and $18,488; $10,179 and
$14,278 were pledged to various parties) 21,515 17,409 Proceeds from paydowns and maturities 5,479 3,814 1,940
Held-to-maturity (fair value of $14,093 and HTM securities:
$17,698; $10,010 and $12,948 were
pledged to various parties) 15,284 19,267 Purchases — (4,228) (3,022)
Securities purchased under agreement to Proceeds from paydowns and maturities 4,003 3,434 3,696
resell to affiliates 24,693 22,987 Securities purchased under agreements to
Advances to subsidiaries: resell with affiliates (1,706) (1,871) 13,581
Bank and BHC 38,550 76,232 Securities sold under agreements to
repurchase with affiliates (8,389) 11,755 (7,422)
Non-bank 139,250 93,593
Advances to and investments in subsidiaries (10,097) (10,574) (17,083)
Equity investments in subsidiaries:
Net cash provided by (used for) investing
Bank and BHC 58,949 59,676 activities (19,772) 1,151 (11,974)
Non-bank 50,291 50,366 Cash flows from financing activities
Other assets 2,595 2,071 Proceeds from:
Total assets $ 372,168 $ 377,325 Issuance of preferred stock, net of issuance
costs — 994 1,275
Liabilities
Issuance of Borrowings 23,783 34,431 42,098
Trading liabilities at fair value $ 44 $ 262
Payments for:
Securities sold under agreements to
repurchase from affiliates 20,293 28,682 Borrowings (22,554) (14,441) (28,592)
Payables to and advances from subsidiaries 73,370 76,170 Repurchases of common stock and employee
tax withholdings (6,178) (10,871) (12,075)
Other liabilities and accrued expenses 2,539 2,282
Cash dividends (5,763) (5,401) (4,171)
Borrowings (includes $13,404 and $12,122 at
fair value) 176,884 169,788 Net change in advances from subsidiaries (3,029) 16,707 17,042
Total liabilities 273,130 277,184 Net cash provided by (used for) financing
activities (13,741) 21,419 15,577
Commitments and contingent liabilities (see Note 14) Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and
cash equivalents 147 485 380
Equity Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash
equivalents (8,452) 9,991 8,240
Preferred stock 8,750 8,750
Cash and cash equivalents, at beginning of
Common stock, $0.01 par value: period 25,333 15,342 7,102
Shares authorized: 3,500,000,000; Shares Cash and cash equivalents, at end of period $ 16,881 $ 25,333 $ 15,342
issued: 2,038,893,979; Shares outstanding:
1,626,828,437 and 1,675,487,409 20 20 Cash and cash equivalents:
Additional paid-in capital 29,832 29,339 Cash and due from banks $ 107 $ 75 $ 100
Retained earnings 97,996 94,862 Deposits with bank subsidiaries 16,774 25,258 15,242
Employee stock trusts 5,314 4,881 Cash and cash equivalents, at end of period $ 16,881 $ 25,333 $ 15,342
Accumulated other comprehensive income Restricted cash $ 1,086 $ 836 $ 441
(loss) (6,421) (6,253)
Common stock held in treasury at cost, $0.01 Supplemental Disclosure of Cash Flow Information
par value (412,065,542 and 363,406,570
shares) (31,139) (26,577) Cash payments for:
Common stock issued to employee stock Interest $ 14,437 $ 5,955 $ 2,970
trusts (5,314) (4,881) Income taxes, net of refunds1 599 3,132 2,775
Total shareholders’ equity 99,038 100,141
Total liabilities and equity $ 372,168 $ 377,325 1. Represents total payments, net of refunds, made to various tax authorities and
includes taxes paid on behalf of certain subsidiaries that are subsequently settled
between the Parent Company and these subsidiaries. The settlements received
from subsidiaries were $1.6 billion, $2.6 billion and $3.0 billion for 2023, 2022 and
2021, respectively.
For information on the Parent Company’s preferred stock, see
Note 17.
December 2023 Form 10-K 148Table of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Parent Company’s Borrowings with Original Maturities Guarantees of Debt Instruments and Warrants Issued by
Greater than One Year Subsidiaries
At At
At At
December 31, December 31,
December 31, December 31,
$ in millions 2023 2022
$ in millions 2023 2022
Aggregate balance $ 60,942 $ 51,136
Senior $ 164,514 $ 157,585
Subordinated 12,370 12,203
Guarantees under Subsidiary Lease Obligations
Total $ 176,884 $ 169,788
At At
Transactions with Subsidiaries December 31, December 31,
$ in millions 2023 2022
The Parent Company has transactions with its consolidated Aggregate balance1 $ 632 $ 615
subsidiaries determined on an agreed-upon basis and has 1. Amounts primarily relate to the U.K.
guaranteed certain unsecured lines of credit and contractual
Finance Subsidiary
obligations on certain of its consolidated subsidiaries.
The Parent Company fully and unconditionally guarantees the
Guarantees
securities issued by Morgan Stanley Finance LLC, a wholly
In the normal course of its business, the Parent Company owned finance subsidiary. No other subsidiary of the Parent
guarantees certain of its subsidiaries’ obligations on a Company guarantees these securities.
transaction-by-transaction basis under various financial
Resolution and Recovery Planning
arrangements. The Parent Company has issued guarantees on
behalf of its subsidiaries to various U.S. and non-U.S.
As indicated in the Firm’s 2023 resolution plan submitted to
exchanges and clearinghouses that trade and clear securities
the Federal Reserve and the FDIC, the Parent Company has
and/or futures contracts. Under these guarantee arrangements,
entered into an amended and restated support agreement with
the Parent Company may be required to pay the financial
its material entities (including its wholly owned, direct
obligations of its subsidiaries related to business transacted on
subsidiary Morgan Stanley Holdings LLC (the “Funding
or with the exchanges and clearinghouses in the event of a
IHC”)) and certain other subsidiaries. Under the amended and
subsidiary’s default on its obligations to the exchange or the
restated secured support agreement, in the event of a
clearinghouse. The Parent Company has not recorded any
resolution scenario, the Parent Company would be obligated
contingent liability in its condensed financial statements for
to contribute all of its contributable assets to its supported
these arrangements and believes that any potential
entities and/or the Funding IHC. The Funding IHC would be
requirements to make payments under these arrangements are
obligated to provide capital and liquidity, as applicable, to its
remote.
supported entities. The obligations of the Parent Company
and the Funding IHC under the amended and restated support
The Parent Company also, in the normal course of business,
agreement are in most cases secured on a senior basis by the
provides standard indemnities to counterparties on behalf of
assets of the Parent Company (other than shares in
its subsidiaries for taxes, including U.S. and foreign
subsidiaries of the Parent Company and certain other assets)
withholding taxes, on interest and other payments made on
and the assets of the Funding IHC.
derivatives, securities and stock lending transactions, and
certain annuity products, and may also provide indemnities to
or on behalf of affiliates from time to time for other
arrangements. These indemnity payments could be required,
as applicable, based on a change in the tax laws, change in
interpretation of applicable tax rulings or claims arising from
contractual relationships between affiliates. Certain contracts
contain provisions that enable the Parent Company to
terminate the agreement upon the occurrence of such events.
The maximum potential amount of future payments that the
Parent Company could be required to make under these
indemnifications cannot be estimated. The Parent Company
has not recorded any contingent liability in its condensed
financial statements for these indemnifications and believes
that the occurrence of any events that would trigger payments
under these contracts is remote.
149 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Financial Data Supplement (Unaudited)
Average Balances and Interest Rates and Net Interest Income Effect of Volume and Rate Changes on Net Interest Income
2023 2022 2023 versus 2022
Increase (Decrease)
Average Average Due to Change in:
Daily Average Daily Average
$ in millions Balance Interest Rate Balance Interest Rate $ in millions Volume Rate Net Change
Interest earning assets Interest earning assets
Cash and cash equivalents1: Cash and cash equivalents1:
U.S. $ 56,920 $ 2,386 4.2 % $ 57,889 $ 692 1.2 % U.S. $ (12) $ 1,706 $ 1,694
Non-U.S. 48,373 1,022 2.1 % 58,052 222 0.4 % Non-U.S. (37) 837 800
Investment Investment
securities2 153,307 3,992 2.6 % 167,494 3,066 1.8 % securities2 (260) 1,186 926
Loans2 215,628 12,424 5.8 % 205,069 6,988 3.4 % Loans2 360 5,076 5,436
Securities purchased under agreements to resell3: Securities purchased under agreements to resell3:
U.S. 47,604 4,714 9.9 % 57,565 1,643 2.9 % U.S. (284) 3,355 3,071
Non-U.S. 61,766 3,048 4.9 % 62,585 545 0.9 % Non-U.S. (7) 2,510 2,503
Securities borrowed4: Securities borrowed4:
U.S. 115,279 4,794 4.2 % 123,288 1,039 0.8 % U.S. (67) 3,822 3,755
Non-U.S. 18,514 397 2.1 % 19,345 (19) (0.1) % Non-U.S. 1 415 416
Trading assets, net of Trading liabilities5: Trading assets, net of Trading liabilities5:
U.S. 93,409 3,792 4.1 % 74,932 2,068 2.8 % U.S. 510 1,214 1,724
Non-U.S. 12,788 696 5.4 % 14,748 416 2.8 % Non-U.S. (55) 335 280
Customer receivables and Other1: Customer receivables and Other1:
U.S. 45,815 9,585 20.9 % 56,040 3,798 6.8 % U.S. (693) 6,480 5,787
Non-U.S. 14,485 3,431 23.7 % 15,891 1,137 7.2 % Non-U.S. (101) 2,395 2,294
Total $ 883,888 $ 50,281 5.7 % $ 912,898 $ 21,595 2.4 % Change in interest income $ (645) $ 29,331 $ 28,686
Interest bearing liabilities Interest bearing liabilities
Deposits2 $ 342,583 $ 8,216 2.4 % $ 340,741 $ 1,825 0.5 % Deposits2 $ 10 $ 6,381 $ 6,391
Borrowings2, 6 238,164 11,437 4.8 % 229,255 5,054 2.2 % Borrowings2,6 196 6,187 6,383
Securities sold under agreements to repurchase7,9: Securities sold under agreements to repurchase7,9:
U.S. 22,718 3,591 15.8 % 21,481 1,086 5.1 % U.S. 63 2,442 2,505
Non-U.S. 46,392 3,146 6.8 % 39,631 674 1.7 % Non-U.S. 115 2,357 2,472
Securities loaned8,9: Securities loaned8,9:
U.S. 4,244 67 1.6 % 6,277 37 0.6 % U.S. (12) 42 30
Non-U.S. 9,470 717 7.6 % 7,669 466 6.1 % Non-U.S. 109 142 251
Customer payables and Other10: Customer payables and Other10:
U.S. 133,069 10,225 7.7 % 143,448 1,991 1.4 % U.S. (144) 8,378 8,234
Non-U.S. 63,916 4,652 7.3 % 73,291 1,135 1.5 % Non-U.S. (145) 3,662 3,517
Total $ 860,556 $ 42,051 4.9 % $ 861,793 $ 12,268 1.4 % Change in interest expense $ 192 $ 29,591 $ 29,783
Net interest income and Change in net interest income $ (837) $ (260) $ (1,097)
net interest rate spread $ 8,230 0.8 % $ 9,327 1.0 %
December 2023 Form 10-K 150Table of Contents
Financial Data Supplement (Unaudited)
Average Balances and Interest Rates and Net Interest Income Effect of Volume and Rate Changes on Net Interest Income
2021 2022 versus 2021
Increase (Decrease)
Average Due to Change in:
Daily Average
$ in millions Balance Interest Rate $ in millions Volume Rate Net Change
Interest earning assets Interest earning assets
Cash and cash equivalents1: Cash and cash equivalents1:
U.S. $ 62,340 $ 44 0.1 % U.S. $ (3) $ 651 $ 648
Non-U.S. 52,106 (37) (0.1) % Non-U.S. (4) 263 259
Investment securities2 182,896 2,759 1.5 % Investment securities2 (232) 539 307
Loans2 166,675 4,209 2.5 % Loans2 970 1,809 2,779
Securities purchased under agreements to resell3: Securities purchased under agreements to resell3:
U.S. 55,274 86 0.2 % U.S. 4 1,553 1,557
Non-U.S. 53,323 (267) (0.5) % Non-U.S. (46) 858 812
Securities borrowed4: Securities borrowed4:
U.S. 99,667 (825) (0.8) % U.S. (196) 2,060 1,864
Non-U.S. 17,387 (192) (1.1) % Non-U.S. (22) 195 173
Trading assets, net of Trading liabilities5: Trading assets, net of Trading liabilities5:
U.S. 77,916 1,644 2.1 % U.S. (63) 487 424
Non-U.S. 19,559 394 2.0 % Non-U.S. (97) 119 22
Customer receivables and Other1: Customer receivables and Other1:
U.S. 72,665 1,365 1.9 % U.S. (312) 2,745 2,433
Non-U.S. 21,962 231 1.1 % Non-U.S. (64) 970 906
Total $ 881,770 $ 9,411 1.1 % Change in interest income $ (65) $ 12,249 $ 12,184
Interest bearing liabilities Interest bearing liabilities
Deposits2 $ 325,500 $ 409 0.1 % Deposits2 $ 19 $ 1,397 $ 1,416
Borrowings2,6 224,657 2,725 1.2 % Borrowings2,6 56 2,273 2,329
Securities sold under agreements to repurchase7,9: Securities sold under agreements to repurchase7,9:
U.S. 29,383 157 0.5 % U.S. (42) 971 929
Non-U.S. 27,374 (64) (0.2) % Non-U.S. (29) 767 738
Securities loaned8,9: Securities loaned8,9:
U.S. 4,816 29 0.6 % U.S. 9 (1) 8
Non-U.S. 5,514 372 6.7 % Non-U.S. 145 (51) 94
Customer payables and Other10: Customer payables and Other10:
U.S. 132,899 (1,825) (1.4) % U.S. (145) 3,961 3,816
Non-U.S. 76,185 (437) (0.6) % Non-U.S. 17 1,555 1,572
Total $ 826,328 $ 1,366 0.2 % Change in interest expense $ 30 $ 10,872 $ 10,902
Net interest income and net interest rate spread $ 8,045 0.9 % Change in net interest income $ (95) $ 1,377 $ 1,282
1. In the fourth quarter of 2023, interest bearing Cash and cash equivalents and
related interest were presented separately for the first time. The prior period
amounts for Customer receivables and Other have been disaggregated to exclude
Cash and cash equivalents to align with the current presentation.
2. Amounts include primarily U.S. balances.
3. Includes interest paid on Securities purchased under agreements to resell.
4. Includes fees paid on Securities borrowed.
5. Excludes non-interest earning assets and non-interest bearing liabilities, such as
equity securities.
6. Average daily balance includes borrowings carried at fair value, but for certain
borrowings, interest expense is considered part of fair value and is recorded in
Trading revenues.
7. Includes interest received on Securities sold under agreements to repurchase.
8. Includes fees received on Securities loaned.
9. The annualized average rate was calculated using (a) interest expense incurred
on all securities sold under agreements to repurchase and securities loaned
transactions, whether or not such transactions were reported in the balance sheet
and (b) net average on-balance sheet balances, which exclude certain securities-
for-securities transactions.
10. Includes fees received from Equity Financing customers related to their short
transactions, which can be under either margin or securities lending
arrangements.
151 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Financial Data Supplement (Unaudited)
Deposits
Average Daily Deposits
2023 2022 2021
$ in Average Average Average Average Average Average
millions Amount Rate Amount Rate Amount Rate
Deposits1:
Savings
and
demand $ 286,513 2.0 % $ 321,316 0.4 % $ 304,664 — %
Time 56,070 4.3 % 19,425 2.7 % 20,836 1.7 %
Total $ 342,583 2.4 % $ 340,741 0.5 % $ 325,500 0.1 %
1. The Firm’s deposits were primarily held in U.S. offices.
December 2023 Form 10-K 152Table of Contents
Glossary of Common Terms and Acronyms
ABS Asset-backed securities IS Institutional Securities
ACL Allowance for credit losses LCR Liquidity coverage ratio, as adopted by the U.S.
AFS Available-for-sale banking agencies
AML Anti-money laundering LIBOR London Interbank Offered Rate
AOCI Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) LTV Loan-to-value
AUM Assets under management or supervision M&A Merger, acquisition and restructuring transaction
Balance Consolidated balance sheet MSBNA Morgan Stanley Bank, N.A.
sheet MS&Co. Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC
BHC Bank holding company MSCG Morgan Stanley Capital Group Inc.
bps Basis points; one basis point equals 1/100th of 1% MSCS Morgan Stanley Capital Services LLC
Cash flow Consolidated cash flow statement MSEHSE Morgan Stanley Europe Holdings SE
statement MSESE Morgan Stanley Europe SE
CCAR Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review
MSIP Morgan Stanley & Co. International plc
CCyB Countercyclical capital buffer
MSMS Morgan Stanley MUFG Securities Co., Ltd.
CDO Collateralized debt obligation(s), including
MSPBNA Morgan Stanley Private Bank, National
Collateralized loan obligation(s)
Association
CDS Credit default swaps MSSB Morgan Stanley Smith Barney LLC
CECL Current Expected Credit Losses, as calculated MUFG Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group, Inc.
under the Financial Instruments—Credit Losses
MUMSS Mitsubishi UFJ Morgan Stanley Securities Co.,
accounting update
Ltd.
CFTC U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission
MWh Megawatt hour
CLN Credit-linked note(s)
N/A Not Applicable
CLO Collateralized loan obligation(s)
N/M Not Meaningful
CMBS Commercial mortgage-backed securities
NAV Net asset value
CMO Collateralized mortgage obligation(s)
Non-GAAP Non-generally accepted accounting principles
CRM Credit Risk Management Department
NSFR Net stable funding ratio, as adopted by the U.S.
CTA Cumulative foreign currency translation
banking agencies
adjustments
OCC Office of the Comptroller of the Currency
DCP Employee deferred cash-based compensation plans
linked to investment performance OCI Other comprehensive income (loss)
DCP Investments associated with certain DCP OIS Overnight index swap
investments OTC Over-the-counter
DVA Debt valuation adjustment PRA Prudential Regulation Authority
EBITDA Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and PSU Performance-based stock unit
amortization
RMBS Residential mortgage-backed securities
ELN Equity-linked note(s)
ROE Return on average common equity
EMEA Europe, Middle East and Africa
ROTCE Return on average tangible common equity
EPS Earnings per common share
ROU Right-of-use
E.U. European Union
RSU Restricted stock unit
FDIC Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
RWA Risk-weighted assets
FFELP Federal Family Education Loan Program
SCB Stress capital buffer
FHC Financial holding company
SEC U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission
FICC Fixed Income Clearing Corporation
SLR Supplementary leverage ratio
FICO Fair Isaac Corporation
SOFR Secured Overnight Financing Rate
Financial Consolidated financial statements
S&P Standard & Poor’s
statements
SPE Special purpose entity
FVA Funding valuation adjustment
SPOE Single point of entry
FVO Fair value option
TLAC Total loss-absorbing capacity
G-SIB Global systemically important banks
U.K. United Kingdom
HELOC Home Equity Line of Credit
UPB Unpaid principal balance
HFI Held-for-investment
U.S. United States of America
HFS Held-for-sale
U.S. Bank Morgan Stanley Bank, N.A. (“MSBNA”) and
HQLA High-quality liquid assets
Subsidiaries Morgan Stanley Private Bank, National
HTM Held-to-maturity Association (“MSPBNA”)
I/E Intersegment eliminations U.S. GAAP Accounting principles generally accepted in the
IHC Intermediate holding company United States of America
IM Investment Management VaR Value-at-Risk
Income Consolidated income statement VIE Variable interest entity
statement WACC Implied weighted average cost of capital
IRS Internal Revenue Service
WM Wealth Management
153 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Changes in and Disagreements with The internal control over financial reporting includes those
Accountants on Accounting and Financial policies and procedures that:
Disclosure
• Pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable
detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and
None.
dispositions of the assets of the Firm;
• Provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded
Controls and Procedures
as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in
accordance with U.S. GAAP and that receipts and
Conclusion Regarding the Effectiveness of Disclosure
expenditures are being made only in accordance with
Controls and Procedures
authorizations of the Firm’s management and directors; and
• Provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or
Under the supervision and with the participation of the Firm’s
timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use or
management, including the Chief Executive Officer and Chief
disposition of Firm assets that could have a material effect
Financial Officer, the Firm conducted an evaluation of the
on the Firm’s financial statements.
effectiveness of the Firm's disclosure controls and procedures
(as defined in Rule 13a-15(e) of the Securities Exchange Act
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over
of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”)). Based on this
financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements.
evaluation, the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial
Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future
Officer concluded that the Firm’s disclosure controls and
periods are subject to the risk that controls may become
procedures were effective as of the end of the period covered
inadequate because of changes in conditions or that the degree
by this annual report.
of compliance with the policies or procedures may
deteriorate.
Management’s Report on Internal Control Over Financial
Reporting
Management assessed the effectiveness of the Firm’s internal
control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2023. In
The Firm’s management is responsible for establishing and
making this assessment, management used the criteria set
maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting.
forth by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the
The Firm’s internal control over financial reporting is
Treadway Commission (“COSO”) in Internal Control—
designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the
Integrated Framework (2013). Based on management’s
reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of
assessment and those criteria, management believes that the
financial statements for external purposes in accordance with
Firm maintained effective internal control over financial
generally accepted accounting principles in the United States
reporting as of December 31, 2023.
of America (“U.S. GAAP”).
The Firm’s independent registered public accounting firm has
audited and issued a report on the Firm’s internal control over
financial reporting, which appears below.
December 2023 Form 10-K 154Table of Contents
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
To the Shareholders and the Board of Directors of Morgan Stanley:
Opinion on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
We have audited the internal control over financial reporting assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, testing and
of Morgan Stanley and subsidiaries (the “Firm”) as of evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal
December 31, 2023, based on criteria established in Internal control based on the assessed risk, and performing such other
Control — Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances.
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our
Commission (COSO). In our opinion, the Firm maintained, in opinion.
all material respects, effective internal control over financial
reporting as of December 31, 2023, based on criteria Definition and Limitations of Internal Control over
established in Internal Control — Integrated Framework Financial Reporting
(2013) issued by COSO.
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a
We have also audited, in accordance with the standards of the process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding
Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of
(PCAOB), the financial statements of the Firm as of and for financial statements for external purposes in accordance with
the year ended December 31, 2023 and our report dated generally accepted accounting principles. A company’s
February 22, 2024 expressed an unqualified opinion on those internal control over financial reporting includes those
financial statements. policies and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance of
records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect
Basis for Opinion the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company;
(2) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are
The Firm’s management is responsible for maintaining recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial
effective internal control over financial reporting and for its statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting
assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company
financial reporting, included in the accompanying are being made only in accordance with authorizations of
Management’s Report on Internal Control Over Financial management and directors of the company; and (3) provide
Reporting. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection
Firm’s internal control over financial reporting based on our of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the
audit. We are a public accounting firm registered with the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the
PCAOB and are required to be independent with respect to financial statements.
the Firm in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws
and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over
Exchange Commission and the PCAOB. financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements.
Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of periods are subject to the risk that controls may become
the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the
perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may
whether effective internal control over financial reporting was deteriorate.
maintained in all material respects. Our audit included
obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial
reporting,
/s/ Deloitte & Touche LLP
New York, New York
February 22, 2024
155 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Changes in Internal Control Over Financial Reporting segments, although we may add offices, depending upon our
future operations.
No change in the Firm’s internal control over financial
reporting (as such term is defined in Exchange Act Rule Legal Proceedings
13a-15(f)) occurred during the quarter ended December 31,
2023 that materially affected, or is reasonably likely to See “Contingencies—Legal” in Note 14 to the Financial
materially affect, the Firm’s internal control over financial Statements for information about our material legal
reporting. proceedings.
Other Information Mine Safety Disclosures
On February 20, 2024 the Compensation, Management Not applicable.
Development and Succession Committee of the Board of
Directors (“CMDS Committee”) of Morgan Stanley approved Market for Registrant’s Common Equity,
amendments to each of the award certificates (“Award Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer
Certificates”) covering all outstanding performance stock
Purchases of Equity Securities
units granted under the Morgan Stanley Equity Incentive
Compensation Plan, including to executive officers of the
Morgan Stanley’s common stock trades under the symbol
Firm. Under the original terms of the Award Certificates,
“MS” on the New York Stock Exchange. As of January 31,
upon termination of employment due to death or disability,
2024, the Firm had 46,887 holders of record; however, the
the participant vests in a prorated portion of the shares earned
Firm believes the number of beneficial owners of the Firm’s
by applying the performance multiplier based on service
common stock exceeds this number.
during the performance period. The CMDS Committee
amended each Award Certificate to provide that, upon
The table below sets forth the information with respect to
termination of employment due to death or disability, the
purchases made by or on behalf of the Firm of its common
participant vests in the full number of shares earned by
stock during the fourth quarter of the year ended December
applying the performance multiplier. Providing for full
31, 2023.
vesting of performance stock units upon termination of
employment due to death or disability is consistent with the Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
provisions of Morgan Stanley’s restricted stock units.
Total Shares
Total Average Purchased as Dollar Value
This description of the Award Certificates is qualified in its Number of Price Part of Share of Remaining
entirety by reference to the full text of the Award Certificates, $ in millions, except per Shares Paid per Repurchase Authorized
share data Purchased1 Share2 Program3, 4 Repurchase
a form of which is filed hereto as Exhibit 10.22.
October 1,948,722 $ 71.77 1,911,600 $ 18,363
November 15,673,256 $ 75.59 15,368,757 $ 17,200
Disclosure Regarding Foreign Jurisdictions
December 201,759 $ 86.45 — $ 17,200
That Prevent Inspections Three Months Ended
December 31, 2023 17,823,737 $ 75.30 17,280,357
Not applicable. 1. Includes 543,380 shares acquired by the Firm in satisfaction of the tax withholding
obligations on stock-based awards granted under the Firm’s stock-based
compensation plans during the three months ended December 31, 2023.
Unresolved Staff Comments 2. Excludes excise tax of $12 million levied on share repurchases, net of issuances,
payable in April 2024.
3. Share purchases under publicly announced authorizations are made pursuant to
The Firm from time to time receives written comments from open-market purchases, Rule 10b5-1 plans or privately negotiated transactions
(including with employee benefit plans) as market conditions warrant and at prices
the staff of the SEC regarding its periodic or current reports
the Firm deems appropriate and may be suspended at any time.
under the Exchange Act. There are no comments that remain 4. The Firm’s Board of Directors has approved the repurchase of the Firm’s
outstanding common stock under a share repurchase authorization (the “Share
unresolved that the Firm received not less than 180 days
Repurchase Authorization”) from time to time as conditions warrant and subject to
before the end of the year to which this report relates that the limitations on distributions from the Federal Reserve. The Share Repurchase
Authorization is for capital management purposes and considers, among other
Firm believes are material.
things, business segment capital needs, as well as equity-based compensation and
benefit plan requirements. The Share Repurchase Authorization has no set
Properties expiration or termination date.
On June 30, 2023, the Firm announced that its Board of
We have offices, operations and data centers located around Directors reauthorized a multi-year repurchase authorization
the world. Our global headquarters and principal executive of up to $20 billion of outstanding common stock, without a
offices are located at 1585 Broadway, New York, New York. set expiration date, beginning in the third quarter of 2023,
Our other principal offices include locations in Manhattan and which will be exercised from time to time as conditions
the greater New York metropolitan area, London, Frankfurt, warrant. For further information, see “Liquidity and Capital
Hong Kong and Tokyo. Our current facilities are adequate for Resources—Regulatory Requirements—Capital Plans, Stress
our present and future operations for each of our business Tests and the Stress Capital Buffer.”
December 2023 Form 10-K 156Table of Contents
Stock Performance Graph Exchange Commission or the New York Stock Exchange
LLC, on the webpage.
The following graph compares the cumulative total
shareholder return (rounded to the nearest whole dollar) of the Executive Compensation
Firm’s common stock, the S&P 500 Stock Index and the S&P
500 Financials Sector Index for the last five years. The graph Information relating to director and executive officer
assumes a $100 investment at the closing price on compensation in Morgan Stanley’s proxy statement is
December 31, 2018 and reinvestment of dividends on the incorporated by reference herein.
respective dividend payment dates without commissions. This
graph does not forecast future performance of the Firm’s Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial
common stock. Owners and Management and Related
Stockholder Matters
Cumulative Total Return
December 31, 2018 – December 31, 2023 Information relating to equity compensation plans and
security ownership of certain beneficial owners and
$300
management in Morgan Stanley’s proxy statement is
incorporated by reference herein.
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions
$200
and Director Independence
Information regarding certain relationships and related
$100
transactions in Morgan Stanley’s proxy statement is
incorporated by reference herein.
$0 Information regarding director independence in Morgan
Dec-2018 Dec-2019 Dec-2020 Dec-2021 Dec-2022 Dec-2023 Stanley’s proxy statement is incorporated by reference herein.
Morgan Stanley
Principal Accountant Fees and Services
S&P 500 Stock Index
S&P 500 Financials Sector Index
Information regarding principal accountant fees and services
At December 31,
in Morgan Stanley’s proxy statement is incorporated by
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
reference herein.
Morgan Stanley $ 100.00 $ 132.66 $ 183.14 $ 268.50 $ 240.57 $ 274.03
S&P 500 Stock Index 100.00 131.21 155.34 199.89 163.65 206.63
Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules
S&P 500 Financials
Sector Index 100.00 132.09 129.77 175.02 156.52 175.46
Documents filed as part of this report
Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate
• The financial statements required to be filed in this annual
Governance
report on Form 10-K are included in the section titled
“Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Information relating to the Firm’s directors and nominees in
the Firm’s definitive proxy statement for its 2024 annual
Exhibit Index1
meeting of shareholders (“Morgan Stanley’s proxy
statement”) is incorporated by reference herein.
Certain of the following exhibits, as indicated parenthetically,
were previously filed as exhibits to registration statements
Information relating to the Firm’s executive officers is
filed by Morgan Stanley or its predecessor companies under
contained in the “Business” section of this report under
the Securities Act or to reports or registration statements filed
“Information about Our Executive Officers.”
by Morgan Stanley or its predecessor companies under the
Exchange Act and are hereby incorporated by reference to
Morgan Stanley’s Code of Ethics and Business Conduct
such statements or reports. Morgan Stanley’s Exchange Act
applies to all directors, officers and employees, including its
file number is 1-11758. The Exchange Act file number of
Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer and Deputy
Morgan Stanley Group Inc., a predecessor company
Chief Financial Officer. You can find the Code of Ethics and
(“MSG”), was 1-9085.
Business Conduct on the webpage, www.morganstanley.com/
content/dam/msdotcom/en/about-us-governance/pdf/
MS_Code_of_Ethics_and_Business_Conduct_2023.pdf. The
Firm will post any amendments to the Code of Ethics and
Business Conduct, and any waivers that are required to be
disclosed by the rules of either the U.S. Securities and
157 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Exhibit Exhibit
No. Description No. Description
3.1 Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation 4.4 The Unit Agreement Without Holders’ Obligations,
of Morgan Stanley, as amended to date (Exhibit 3.1 dated as of August 29, 2008, between Morgan
to Morgan Stanley’s quarterly report on Form 10-Q Stanley and The Bank of New York Mellon, as Unit
for the quarter ended June 30, 2022). Agent, as Trustee and Paying Agent under the
Senior Indenture referred to therein and as Warrant
3.2 Amended and Restated Bylaws of Morgan Stanley,
Agent under the Warrant Agreement referred to
as amended to date (Exhibit 3.1 to Morgan
therein (Exhibit 4.1 to Morgan Stanley’s current
Stanley’s current report on Form 8-K dated
report on Form 8-K dated August 29, 2008).
December 8, 2023).
4.5 Subordinated Indenture dated as of October 1, 2004
4.1* Description of Securities Registered Pursuant to
between Morgan Stanley and The Bank of
Section 12 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
New York, as trustee (Exhibit 4-g to Morgan
4.2 Amended and Restated Senior Indenture dated as of Stanley’s Registration Statement on Form S-3/A
May 1, 1999 between Morgan Stanley and The (No. 333-117752)).
Bank of New York, as trustee (Exhibit 4e to
4.6 Junior Subordinated Indenture dated as of
Morgan Stanley’s Registration Statement on Form
October 12, 2006 between Morgan Stanley and The
S-3/A (No. 333-75289) as amended by Fourth
Bank of New York, as trustee (Exhibit 4.1 to
Supplemental Senior Indenture dated as of October
Morgan Stanley’s current report on Form 8-K dated
8, 2007 (Exhibit 4.3 to Morgan Stanley’s annual
October 12, 2006).
report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended
November 30, 2007). 4.7 Deposit Agreement dated as of July 6, 2006 among
Morgan Stanley, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. and
4.3 Senior Indenture dated as of November 1, 2004
the holders from time to time of the depositary
between Morgan Stanley and The Bank of New
receipts described therein (Exhibit 4.3 to Morgan
York, as trustee (Exhibit 4-f to Morgan Stanley’s
Stanley’s quarterly report on Form 10-Q for the
Registration Statement on Form S-3/A (No.
quarter ended May 31, 2006).
333-117752), as amended by First Supplemental
Senior Indenture dated as of September 4, 2007 4.8 Form of Deposit Agreement among Morgan
(Exhibit 4.5 to Morgan Stanley’s annual report on Stanley, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. and the
Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended November 30, holders from time to time of the depositary receipts
2007), Second Supplemental Senior Indenture dated representing interests in the Series A Preferred
as of January 4, 2008 (Exhibit 4.1 to Morgan Stock described therein (Exhibit 2.4 to Morgan
Stanley’s current report on Form 8-K dated Stanley’s Registration Statement on Form 8-A dated
January 4, 2008), Third Supplemental Senior July 5, 2006).
Indenture dated as of September 10, 2008 (Exhibit 4 4.9 Depositary Receipt for Depositary Shares,
to Morgan Stanley’s quarterly report on Form 10-Q representing Floating Rate Non-Cumulative
for the quarter ended August 31, 2008), Fourth Preferred Stock, Series A (included in Exhibit 4.8
Supplemental Senior Indenture dated as of hereto).
December 1, 2008 (Exhibit 4.1 to Morgan Stanley’s
4.10 Form of Deposit Agreement among Morgan
current report on Form 8-K dated December 1,
Stanley, The Bank of New York Mellon and the
2008), Fifth Supplemental Senior Indenture dated as
holders from time to time of the depositary receipts
of April 1, 2009 (Exhibit 4 to Morgan Stanley’s
representing interests in the Series E Preferred
quarterly report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended
Stock described therein (Exhibit 2.6 to Morgan
March 31, 2009), Sixth Supplemental Senior
Stanley’s Registration Statement on Form 8-A dated
Indenture dated as of September 16, 2011 (Exhibit
September 27, 2013).
4.1 to Morgan Stanley’s quarterly report on Form
10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2011), 4.11 Depositary Receipt for Depositary Shares,
Seventh Supplemental Senior Indenture dated as of representing Fixed-to-Floating Rate Non-
November 21, 2011 (Exhibit 4.4 to Morgan Cumulative Preferred Stock, Series E (included in
Stanley’s annual report on Form 10-K for the year Exhibit 4.10 hereto).
ended December 31, 2011), Eighth Supplemental
4.12 Form of Deposit Agreement among Morgan
Senior Indenture dated as of May 4, 2012
Stanley, The Bank of New York Mellon and the
(Exhibit 4.1 to Morgan Stanley’s quarterly report on
holders from time to time of the depositary receipts
Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2012),
representing interests in the Series F Preferred stock
Ninth Supplemental Senior Indenture dated as of
described therein (Exhibit 2.4 to Morgan Stanley’s
March 10, 2014 (Exhibit 4.1 to Morgan Stanley’s
Registration Statement on Form 8-A dated
quarterly report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended
December 9, 2013).
March 31, 2014), Tenth Supplemental Senior
Indenture dated as of January 11, 2017 (Exhibit 4.1 4.13 Depositary Receipt for Depositary Shares,
to Morgan Stanley’s current report on Form 8-K representing Fixed-to-Floating Rate Non-
dated January 11, 2017) and Eleventh Supplemental Cumulative Preferred Stock, Series F (included in
Senior Indenture dated as of March 24, 2021 Exhibit 4.12 hereto).
(Exhibit 4.4 to Morgan Stanley's annual report on
Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2021).
December 2023 Form 10-K 158Table of Contents
Exhibit Exhibit
No. Description No. Description
4.14 Form of Deposit Agreement among Morgan 10.1 Amended and Restated Trust Agreement dated as of
Stanley, The Bank of New York Mellon and the January 1, 2018 by and between Morgan Stanley
holders from time to time of the depositary receipts and State Street Bank and Trust Company (Exhibit
representing interests in the Series I Preferred stock 10.1 to Morgan Stanley’s quarterly report on Form
described therein (Exhibit 2.4 to Morgan Stanley’s 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2018).
Registration Statement on Form 8-A dated
10.2 Amended and Restated Investor Agreement dated as
September 17, 2014).
of June 30, 2011 by and between Morgan Stanley
4.15 Depositary Receipt for Depositary Shares, and Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group, Inc. (Exhibit
representing Fixed-to-Floating Rate Non- 10.1 to Morgan Stanley’s current report on Form 8-
Cumulative Preferred Stock, Series I (included in K dated June 30, 2011), as amended by Third
Exhibit 4.14 hereto). Amendment, dated October 3, 2013 (Exhibit 10.1 to
Morgan Stanley’s quarterly report on Form 10-Q
4.16 Form of Deposit Agreement among Morgan
for the quarter ended September 30, 2013), Fourth
Stanley, The Bank of New York Mellon and the
Amendment, dated April 6, 2016 (Exhibit 10.1 to
holders from time to time of the depositary receipts
Morgan Stanley’s quarterly report on Form 10-Q
representing interests in the Series K Preferred
for the quarter ended March 31, 2016), Fifth
Stock described therein (Exhibit 2.4 to Morgan
Amendment, dated October 4, 2018 (Exhibit 10.3 to
Stanley’s Registration Statement on Form 8-A dated
Morgan Stanley’s annual report on Form 10-K for
January 30, 2017).
the year ended December 31, 2020), Sixth
4.17 Depositary Receipt for Depositary Shares, Amendment, dated April 13, 2021 (Exhibit 10.1 to
representing Fixed-to-Floating Rate Non- Morgan Stanley’s quarterly report on Form 10-Q
Cumulative Preferred Stock, Series K (included in for the quarter ended June 30, 2021) and Seventh
Exhibit 4.16 hereto). Amendment, dated October 13, 2023 (Exhibit 10.1
to Morgan Stanley’s quarterly report on Form 10-Q
4.18 Form of Deposit Agreement among Morgan
for the quarter ended September 30, 2023).
Stanley, The Bank of New York Mellon and the
holders from time to time of the depositary receipts 10.3† Morgan Stanley 401(k) Plan, amended and restated
representing interests in the Series L Preferred as of January 1, 2018 (Exhibit 10.4 to Morgan
Stock described therein (Exhibit 2.4 to Morgan Stanley’s annual report on Form 10-K for the year
Stanley’s Registration Statement on Form 8-A dated ended December 31, 2018), as amended by
November 22, 2019). Amendment (Exhibit 10.4 to Morgan Stanley’s
annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended
4.19 Depositary Receipt for Depositary Shares,
December 31, 2019) and Amendment (Exhibit 10.6
representing 4.875% Non-Cumulative Preferred
to Morgan Stanley’s annual report on Form 10-K
Stock, Series L (included in Exhibit 4.18 hereto).
for the year ended December 31, 2020),
4.20 Form of Deposit Agreement among Morgan Amendment (Exhibit 10.4 to Morgan Stanley’s
Stanley, The Bank of New York Mellon and the annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended
holders from time to time of the depositary receipts December 31, 2021) and Amendment (Exhibit 10.4
representing interests in the Series N Preferred to Morgan Stanley’s annual report on Form 10-K
Stock described therein (Exhibit 4.5 to Morgan for the year ended December 31, 2022).
Stanley’s current report on Form 8-K dated October
2, 2020). 10.4†* Amendment to Morgan Stanley 401(k) Plan, dated
December 15, 2023.
4.21 Depositary Receipt for Depositary Shares,
representing Fixed-to-Floating Rate Non- 10.5† Tax Deferred Equity Participation Plan as amended
Cumulative Preferred Stock, Series N (included in and restated as of November 26, 2007 (Exhibit 10.9
Exhibit 4.20 hereto). to Morgan Stanley’s annual report on Form 10-K
4.22 Form of Deposit Agreement among Morgan for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2007).
Stanley, The Bank of New York Mellon and the 10.6† Directors’ Equity Capital Accumulation Plan as
holders from time to time of the depositary receipts amended and restated as of November 1, 2022
representing interests in the Series O Preferred (Exhibit 10.6 to Morgan Stanley's annual report on
Stock described therein (Exhibit 2.4 to Morgan Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022).
Stanley’s Registration Statement on Form 8-A dated
10.7† Employees’ Equity Accumulation Plan as amended
October 22, 2021).
and restated as of November 26, 2007
4.23 Depositary Receipt for Depositary Shares, (Exhibit 10.12 to Morgan Stanley’s annual report on
representing 4.250% Non-Cumulative Preferred Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended November 30,
Stock, Series O (included in Exhibit 4.22 hereto). 2007).
4.24 Form of Deposit Agreement among Morgan 10.8† Employee Stock Purchase Plan as amended and
Stanley, The Bank of New York Mellon and the restated as of August 1, 2022 (Exhibit 10.8 to
holders from time to time of the depositary receipts Morgan Stanley's annual report on Form 10-K for
representing interests in the Series P Preferred the year ended December 31, 2022).
Stock described therein (Exhibit 2.4 to Morgan
Stanley’s Registration Statement on Form 8-A dated
August 1, 2022).
4.25 Depositary Receipt for Depositary Shares,
representing 6.500% Non-Cumulative Preferred
Stock, Series P (included in Exhibit 4.24 hereto).
159 December 2023 Form 10-KTable of Contents
Exhibit Exhibit
No. Description No. Description
10.9† Morgan Stanley Supplemental Executive 10.21†* Form of Award Certificate for Discretionary
Retirement and Excess Plan, amended and restated Retention Awards under the Morgan Stanley
effective December 31, 2008 (Exhibit 10.2 to Compensation Incentive Plan.
Morgan Stanley’s quarterly report on Form 10-Q 10.22†* Form of Award Certificate for Long-Term Incentive
for the quarter ended March 31, 2009) as amended Program Awards.
by Amendment (Exhibit 10.5 to Morgan Stanley’s
quarterly report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended 10.23† Form of Aircraft Time-Sharing Agreement (Exhibit
June 30, 2009), Amendment (Exhibit 10.19 to 10.1 to Morgan Stanley’s quarterly report on Form
Morgan Stanley’s annual report on Form 10-K for 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2020).
the year ended December 31, 2010), Amendment 21* Subsidiaries of Morgan Stanley.
(Exhibit 10.3 to Morgan Stanley’s quarterly report
22* Guarantor and Subsidiary Issuer of Registered
on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2011)
Guaranteed Securities.
and Amendment (Exhibit 10.1 to Morgan Stanley’s
quarterly report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended 23.1* Consent of Deloitte & Touche LLP.
September 30, 2014).
24 Powers of Attorney (included on signature page).
10.10† Form of Deferred Compensation Agreement under
31.1* Rule 13a-14(a) Certification of Chief Executive
the Pre-Tax Incentive Program 2 (Exhibit 10.12 to
Officer.
MSG’s annual report for the fiscal year ended
November 30, 1996). 31.2* Rule 13a-14(a) Certification of Chief Financial
Officer.
10.11† Morgan Stanley UK Share Ownership Plan (Exhibit
32.1** Section 1350 Certification of Chief Executive
4.1 to Morgan Stanley’s Registration Statement on
Officer.
Form S-8 (No. 333-146954)).
32.2** Section 1350 Certification of Chief Financial
10.12† Supplementary Deed of Participation for the
Officer.
Morgan Stanley UK Share Ownership Plan, dated
as of November 5, 2009 (Exhibit 10.36 to Morgan 97* Morgan Stanley Compensation Recoupment Policy.
Stanley’s annual report on Form 10-K for the year 101 Interactive Data Files pursuant to Rule 405 of
ended December 31, 2009). Regulation S-T formatted in Inline eXtensible
10.13† Aircraft Time-Sharing Agreement, dated as of Business Reporting Language (“Inline XBRL”).
January 1, 2010, by and between Corporate
104 Cover Page Interactive Data File (formatted in
Services Support Corp. and James P. Gorman
Inline XBRL and contained in Exhibit 101).
(Exhibit 10.1 to Morgan Stanley’s quarterly report
on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 1. For purposes of this Exhibit Index, references to “The Bank of New York” mean in
2010). some instances the entity successor to JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. or J.P. Morgan
Trust Company, National Association; references to “JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A.”
10.14† Agreement between Morgan Stanley and James P. mean the entity formerly known as The Chase Manhattan Bank, in some instances
Gorman, dated August 16, 2005, and amendment as the successor to Chemical Bank; references to “J.P. Morgan Trust Company,
dated December 17, 2008 (Exhibit 10.2 to Morgan N.A.” mean the entity formerly known as Bank One Trust Company, N.A., as
successor to The First National Bank of Chicago.
Stanley’s quarterly report on Form 10-Q for the
quarter ended March 31, 2010), as amended by * Filed herewith.
Amendment (Exhibit 10.25 to Morgan Stanley’s
** Furnished herewith.
annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended
December 31, 2013). † Management contract or compensatory plan or
arrangement required to be filed as an exhibit to this
10.15† Form of Restrictive Covenant Agreement (Exhibit
Form 10-K pursuant to Item 15(b).
10 to Morgan Stanley’s current report on Form 8-K
dated November 22, 2005).
10.16† Equity Incentive Compensation Plan, as amended Note: Other instruments defining the rights of holders of long-
and restated as of December 14, 2020 (Exhibit term debt securities of Morgan Stanley and its subsidiaries are
10.19 to Morgan Stanley's annual report on Form omitted pursuant to Section (b)(4)(iii) of Item 601 of
10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020).
Regulation S-K. Morgan Stanley hereby agrees to furnish
10.17† Morgan Stanley Compensation Incentive Plan, as copies of these instruments to the U.S. Securities and
amended and restated as of December 14, 2020
Exchange Commission upon request.
(Exhibit 10.24 to Morgan Stanley's annual report on
Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020)
Form 10-K Summary
10.18† Morgan Stanley Schedule of Non-Employee
Directors Annual Compensation, effective as of
None.
November 1, 2022 (Exhibit 10.18 to Morgan
Stanley's annual report on Form 10-K for the year
ended December 31, 2022).
10.19† Description of Operating Committee Medical
Coverage (Exhibit 10.2 to Morgan Stanley’s
quarterly report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended
March 31, 2015).
10.20†* Form of Award Certificate for Discretionary
Retention Awards of Stock Units.
December 2023 Form 10-K 160Table of Contents
Signatures
Signature Title
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the
/s/ ERIKA H. JAMES Director
Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the Registrant has duly
caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the (Erika H. James)
undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, on February 22,
2024. /s/ HIRONORI KAMEZAWA Director
(Hironori Kamezawa)
MORGAN STANLEY
(REGISTRANT)
By: /s/ EDWARD PICK /s/ SHELLEY B. LEIBOWITZ Director
(Shelley B. Leibowitz)
(Edward Pick)
Chief Executive Officer
/s/ STEPHEN J. LUCZO Director
POWER OF ATTORNEY (Stephen J. Luczo)
We, the undersigned, hereby severally constitute Sharon /s/ JAMI MISCIK Director
Yeshaya, Eric F. Grossman and Martin M. Cohen, and each (Jami Miscik)
of them singly, our true and lawful attorneys with full power
to them and each of them to sign for us, and in our names in
/s/ MASATO MIYACHI Director
the capacities indicated below, any and all amendments to the
annual report on Form 10-K filed with the Securities and (Masato Miyachi)
Exchange Commission, hereby ratifying and confirming our
signatures as they may be signed by our said attorneys to any /s/ DENNIS M. NALLY Director
and all amendments to said annual report on Form 10-K.
(Dennis M. Nally)
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act
of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following /s/ MARY L. SCHAPIRO Director
persons on behalf of the Registrant and in the capacities (Mary L. Schapiro)
indicated on the 22nd day of February, 2024.
/s/ PERRY M. TRAQUINA Director
Signature Title
(Perry M. Traquina)
/s/ EDWARD PICK Chief Executive Officer
(Edward Pick) (Principal Executive /s/ RAYFORD WILKINS, JR. Director
Officer)
(Rayford Wilkins, Jr.)
Executive Vice President
/s/ SHARON YESHAYA and Chief Financial Officer
(Sharon Yeshaya) (Principal Financial Officer)
Deputy Chief Financial
/s/ RAJA J. AKRAM Officer
(Raja J. Akram) (Chief Accounting Officer
and Controller)
/s/ JAMES P. GORMAN Chairman of the Board
(James P. Gorman)
/s/ THOMAS H. GLOCER Director
(Thomas H. Glocer)
/s/ ROBERT H. HERZ Director
(Robert H. Herz)
161 December 2023 Form 10-K